Starter guide
Your career is your biggest opportunity to make a difference. But
how can you make the most of it? We’ve spent the last ten years
searching for the answer to that question.
We’ve found that some paths open to you probably have far more
impact than others, but they’re often not what people are already
focused on. This means we need to rethink social impact careers –
and that by doing so, there’s a chance you can find a career that’s
both higher-impact and personally satisfying.
In the series, you’ll learn about the ideas that have most changed
our view of what makes for a high-impact career. We start with
how to define impact, and then go on to four key drivers of your
impact, which you can use to compare your options in terms of the
difference they make. Finally, we introduce the most important
elements of career strategy.
There are 16 key articles, which you can read over a weekend. At
the end, you’ll have covered everything you need to know to start
making a new career plan.
All this might sound like a lot of work, but if you can increase the
impact of your career by just 1%, it would be worth spending up
to 800 hours learning how to do that. And we think we can
increase your impact by much more, and in much less time.
80,000 Hours is part of the Centre for Effective Altruism, a registered charity in England and Wales, Registered Charity Number 1149828
Centre for Effective Altruism, Oxford Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics, Littlegate House, St Ebbes Street, Oxford OX1 1PT, UK
WWW.80000HOURS.ORG

Table of contents
1. Introduction
Summary: what makes for a high-impact career?
This is your most important decision
2. Foundations: what does it mean to make a difference?
What is social impact? A definition
Longtermism: the moral significance of future generations
Effective altruism
Other foundational articles
3. Global priorities: what’s the world’s most pressing problem?
Why the problem you work on is the biggest driver of your impact
The case for reducing existential risks
This could be the most important century
Our current list of pressing world problems
Other key articles on global priorities
4. Solutions: how can you find the most effective ways to tackle your
chosen problem?
The best solutions are far more effective than others
Other key articles on effective solutions
5. Leverage: which careers are highest impact?
What is leverage, and how can you get it?
Our list of high-impact careers
Other key articles on leverage

6. Personal fit: what are you good at?
Personal fit: why being good at your job is even more important than people
think
Other key articles on personal fit
7. Strategy: how to find your best career
Career capital: how best to invest in yourself
Career exploration: when should you settle?
How to balance impact and doing what you love
Be more ambitious: a rational case for dreaming big (if you want to do good)
3 key career stages
Other key articles on career strategy
8. Conclusion: how much do careers differ in impact?
Why some of your career options probably have 100x the impact of others
What’s next: make your new career plan

1. Introduction
Summary: what makes for a high-impact career?
TL;DR: Get good at something that lets you effectively contribute to neglected global
problems.
Prefer to listen rather than read?Hear our founderand CEO, Ben Todd, discuss some
of the most important ideas in the series inepisode#71 of the 80,000 Hours Podcast.
You can have more positive impact over the course of your career by aiming to:
1. Help solve a more pressing problem.
Many global issues should get more attention, but as individuals we should look
for the biggest gaps in existing efforts. To do that, you can compare issues in
terms of scale, neglectedness, and tractability. It turns out that some issues
receivehundredsof times less attention relative to how big and solvable they
seem. This means which issues you choose to work on is likely the biggest driver
of your impact. In particular, our generation may see the rise of transformative
technologies, which could lead to existential risks and make now a crucial
moment in history — but our current institutions are doing little to address these
issues. We have a list of global issues we think are particularly pressing for more
people to work on right now.
2. Find a more effective solution.
Many social interventions don’t have much effect when rigorously measured, but
some are enormously effective. This means that by finding a more effective
solution to your chosen problem, you can often make 10 or 100 times as much
progress per year of work. To find these solutions, we advocate a ‘hits-based
approach’: find rules of thumb that increase the chance of the solution being
among the most effective in an area, even if it also has a good chance of not
working. This often means working on research, policy change, or movement
building.
3. Find a path with more leverage.
Your ‘leverage’ is how many resources (e.g. money, attention, skill) you’re able to
mobilise toward the solution. To get more leverage on the most pressing
problems, we often encourage people to work in government and policy; to
pursue careers where they can mobilise others (e.g. media); to help people or
organisations that have a lot of leverage; or to use their strengths to contribute

indirectly through donations or community building. Most people only reach
their peak productivity between the ages of 40–60, so we also encourage
people to invest in their skills, connections, reputation etc. to have more
leverage in the future. See our list of especially promising career paths.
4. Find work that fits you better.
The most productive people in a field often have far more output than the
average. Plus, excelling in almost any field gives you more connections,
resources and reputation, which give you leverage. So, once you have identified
some promising options, choose between them based on your expected fit.
Career strategy: Your most impactful career is the one that’s best on the product of
these four factors over its course — and it’s often possible to find a path that’s 10 times
better on one or more of these dimensions while being just as personally satisfying.
But how do you actually find the best possible path? Think like a scientist: make some
best guesses at the most promising long-term paths, identify key uncertainties, then
update your guesses every 1–3 years. Over time, especially focus on the following
three (overlapping) stages:
1. Explore: learn about and test out promising longer-term paths, until you feel
ready to bet on one for a few years. It’s hard to predict where you’ll have the
best fit, but some paths are much higher-impact than others, so it’s worth
exploring to make sure you don’t miss a great one. (This is typically the key focus
for people ages 18–24.)
2. Invest: take a bet on a longer-term path by building the career capital that will
most accelerate you in it. It’s normally better to aim a little too high than too low
— but make sure you have a backup plan, so you can try another path if it
doesn’t work out. (Ages 25–35.)
3. Deploy: use the career capital you’ve built to support the most effective
solutions to the most pressing problems at the time. (Age 36 onwards.)
While doing this, seek community. Finding a great community gives you hundreds of
connections at once, and two people working together can have more than twice the
impact than one person alone. We helped to build the effective altruism community to
help you (and ourselves!) find like-minded people.
Focusing your career on tackling the world’s most pressing problems is not for
everyone and is certainly not easy. If you’re not able to change jobs right now, you can
still have a lot of impact by enabling others, politically supporting, or donating to work
on the problems you think are most pressing, while also investing in your career capital.

If you do change careers, look for work you enjoy and that meets your other needs. If a
path feels like a struggle, it’s probably not sustainable or inspiring to others, and so
probably not ideal even for your impact.
Fortunately, we think the steps we recommend — building career capital, exploring,
and contributing to meaningful problems — align with what’s personally rewarding for
a lot of people. And so while there may be some tradeoffs, we think these steps are a
route to a career that’s satisfying and fulfilling, as well as one that addresses some of
the biggest issues of our time.
Example: Sophie Rose
Sophie was on a path to become a clinical
doctor in Australia when she came across our
research into how many lives a doctor saves
in rich countries. She realised she might be
able to have even more impact doing
something else.
She heardour podcast with Beth Cameron
about why a global pandemic is a realistic possibility (back in
2017!), though the issue was neglected compared to conventional
medicine. So she decided to try to switch which problem she
focused on.
She spoke to us one-on-one, and we helped her find funding for a
master’s in epidemiology to build career capital in the area.
When COVID-19 broke out, she was able to zero in on a neglected
but potentially high-impact solution: human challenge trials, which
can greatly speed up the development of vaccines.
She increased her leverage by co-founding 1DaySooner with a
grant from others in our community. 1DaySooner is a nonprofit that
signed up 30,000 volunteers for human challenge trials in order to
speed up government vaccine approval — potentially enabling
many academic labs to go ahead with studies. A challenge trial
started in London in early 2021, setting a precedent that will
hopefully make our response much faster if another pandemic
breaks out.

Although Sophie would likely also have enjoyed being a doctor,
this path has also been a good fit for her skills and because she
thinks she’s having a greater impact, she finds it meaningful. She
now plans to double down on what she’s learned, and work on
preventing the (unfortunately realistic) possibility of a future
pandemic even worse than COVID-19.
You can hear more about Sophie’s story in thisinterviewin Marie
Claire.
What research is this based on?
Careers decisions are highly individual, so there are many questions we can’t easily
help with. We aim to focus on career questions that are more widely relevant. To
answer the questions we tackle, we draw on:
● Expert interviews — you can listen to over 60 examples of these interviews on
our podcast, and also see the results of some anonymous interviews, and our
annual survey. Our first pass on many questions involves synthesising what
several experts say on the question.
● Academic literature — we aim to draw on academic literature where it’s
available, such as the literature on existential risks, the distribution of
productivity in different fields, and how to make good decisions. We’re also
affiliated with some academic partners.
● Advising our readers — we’ve given one-on-one advice to over 1,000 people
since 2011, many of whom we’re still in touch with. This gives us a sense of what
mistakes are common, as well as some indication of how decisions play out over
time.
It’s not usually possible to confidently answer the kinds of questions we tackle.
However, we do our best to synthesise the sources of evidence we draw on, using our
research principles. We also aim to highlight the key aspects of our reasoning so that
readers can make their own assessments.

Advice on how to read our advice
The topics we tackle are complex, and in the past we’ve noticed people interpreting
our advice in ways we didn’t intend. Here are some points to bear in mind before
diving into our advice.
● We want our writing to inform people’s views, but only in proportion to the
likelihood that we are correct. Given that, it’s important to keep in mind that
we’ve been wrong before and we’ll be wrong again. We’ve spent a lot of time
thinking about these issues, but we still have a lot to learn. Our positions often
change every couple of years, and due to the nature of the questions we take on
we’re rarely more than about 70% confident in our answers. You should try to
strike a balance between what we think and your previous position, depending
on the strength of the arguments and how much you already knew about the
topic.
● It’s extremely difficult to give universally applicable career advice. The most
important issue here is that which option is best for you depends a huge amount
on your skills and circumstances, and the specific details of the opportunity. So,
while we might highlight path A more than path B, the best opportunities in
path B will often be better than the typical opportunities in path A. Moreover,
your personal circumstances could easily mean the best option for you is in path
B. So, treat the specific options we mention as an aid for compiling your
personal list of career ideas. Also keep in mind that many issues in career choice
are a matter of balancing opposing considerations — for instance, if we say
people put too much emphasis on X, there will usually besomereaders who put
too little emphasis on X, and need to hear the opposite advice.
● Our advice is aimed at a particular audience: namely, people with college
degrees who want to make having a positive impact (from an impartial
perspective) the main focus of their careers, especially in the problem areas we
most recommend; who live in rich, (for the most part) English-speaking
countries; and who want to take an analytical approach to their career. At any
given moment many people need to focus on taking care of their own lives, and
we don’t think anyone should feel guilty if that’s the case. Certain parts of our
advice, such as our list of priority paths, are especially aimed at people who are
unusually high achieving. In general, the more similar you are to our core
audience, the more useful the advice will be, although much of what we write is
useful to anyone who wants to make a difference.
● Treat increasing your impact as just one long-term goal. Working on the world’s
most pressing problems is among the most worthwhile challenges we can
imagine, though it can also be overwhelming. Bear in mind, 80,000 Hours is
about how to maximise your impact, and this can make it sound like we don’t

care about other goals. However, the team sees increasing our impact as just
one important goal among several in our lives, which means we often do things
that aren’t optimal from the perspective of doing good. Indeed, even if your
onlygoal was to have an impact, to do that it’s vital to do something you can
stick with for years — and this means taking care of your personal priorities as
well.
● Aim for steady progress rather than perfection. It can take a long time to work
out how to factor the ideas we cover into your own plans and find the right
opportunity. Along the way, because there’s always more that could be done, it
can be easy to become overly perfectionist, get caught up with comparisons,
and never be satisfied. When using our advice, the aim is not to find the
(unknowable and unattainable) perfect option, or have more impact than other
people. Rather, focus on making steady progress towards the best career that’s
practical for you given your constraints.
● Older articles on the site are less likely to reflect our current views, so check
their publication date. We also aim to keep this key ideas page up to date as
the canonical source of advice, and to flag older articles when our views have
changed, though we have hundreds of pages of content, so we don’t catch
everything.
Read more.
Now, you can read the full key ideas series below to learn more about each step, or go
straight to making a career plan.

This is your most important decision
Click to read online
You have about 80,000 hours in your career: 40 hours per week, 50 weeks per year, for 40
years.
This makes your choice of career the most important ethical decision of your life.
From adulthood, you’ll spend almost half your waking hours on your career — more than
the time you’ll spend eating, on hobbies, and watching Netflix put together. So unless
you happen to be the heir to a large estate, that time is the biggest resource you have to
help others.
This means if you can increase the positive impact of those hours just a little, it will
probably have a bigger impact than changes to any other parts of your life.
And we’re going to show that — if you have the privilege to have options — you can
probably increase the impact of your career not just by a little, but by a huge amount.
Some of the paths open to you probably do vastly more for the world than others, but
they’re probably not the ones you’re currently focusing on.
Our generation faces issues of historical importance, and you can help tackle them. And
you don’t have to become a doctor, teacher or a charity worker — there are many other
routes to contribute that can be even higher impact.
By considering a broader range of routes, you may be able to find a path that has far
more impact, while being just as — or even more — fulfilling as the path you’re currently
on.
So how did we end up thinking this?
When our founders, Ben and Will, were about to graduate in 2011, they wanted to find
work they enjoyed, that paid the bills, and that made a contribution to the world. But
they felt really unsure what to do.
Given the huge amount of time at stake, it seemed worth doing some real research to
find the best path. But it didn’t feel like the existing careers advice eventriedto compare
paths in terms of impact, nor was it based on much evidence. So they started to research
the question themselves.
After 10 years of research, we now think the impact you can have in different career paths
— however exactly you define ‘impact’ — is driven by four main factors:
1. How pressing the problems you focus on are

2. How effective the solutions you pursue are
3. The amount of leverage you can apply to those solutions
4. Your personal fit for the path
In this article, we’ll show how you can use these factors to compare your options in terms
of impact, and find new ways to contribute. (If you just want to see the bottom lines,
here’s a two page summary.)
We’ll also explain how the rest of our (free) research and support can help you apply
these ideas and give you the best possible chance of finding a rewarding career that
fulfils your potential for impact.
Understanding and applying these ideas takes time. But if you’d spend six minutes
discussing where to go for a two-hour dinner, you should be willing to spend up to 4,000
hours researching your career. And while we sometimes do go on a bit, we promise it’ll
be quicker than that.
Each dot illustrates one of the 80,000 hours in your career.
You can read our key ideas in under four of them.
So let’s start with the first and most important factor.

Which problems should you work on?
We think the most crucial question you face in choosing an impactful career is which
problem or issue to focus on — whether that’s health, education, climate change,
engineered pandemics, or something else.
Most people seem to think that comparing the importance of these kinds of issues is near
impossible, and you should just work on whatever issue you’re passionate about.
But we think it’s clear that some problems are much bigger than others.
Climate change is widely considered one of the world’s biggest problems, and we think
it’s even bigger than often supposed. While the most likely scenario is several degrees of
warming, the uncertainty in climate models means it’s hard to rule out a 5% chance of
over 10°C warming.
What’s more, the CO2 we emit today will stay in the atmosphere for tens of thousands of
years, impacting our children’s grandchildren and beyond. We think future generations
matter, which makes the issue even bigger in scale.
But we also think there may be issues that are even larger again.
The philosopher Toby Ord has argued that in 1945 humanity entered a new age, which
he callsthe Precipice. On July 16, 1945 humanity detonated the first atomic bomb, which
would eventually make it possible — for the first time in history — for a small group of
people to destroy most of the world’s cities within hours.
The annual risk of an all-out nuclear exchange is small, but it’s not zero: more countries
are armed than ever, and there is always the chance of an accident or malfunction. The
average of several expert surveys is an annual probability of 0.4%.
Compounded over our lives and the lives of our children, this adds up to a substantial
chance of a catastrophe potentially more devastating than climate change.
Besides killing most people living in urban areas, the resulting fires could lift enough ash
into the air to obscure the sun and reduce global temperatures for years, leading to
widespread famine.
Within months, this would not only kill most people alive today, but it could also lead to
a collapse of civilisation itself. We think a permanent collapse is very unlikely, but when
we consider the scale of the consequences — the loss of all future generations — that
risk may be the worst thing about a nuclear conflict.
But the possibility of extreme climate change and nuclear winter are just two examples of
a broader trend.

Technology has given this generation unprecedented power to shape history. The
consequences of the decisions we make today about nuclear weapons, genetic
engineering, artificial intelligence, space settlement, and other emerging technologies
could ripple forward for thousands of years, with either enormously positive or
enormously negative consequences.
So: Some problems aremuch biggerthan others.
At the same time, some problems are much more neglected by society.
For instance, in 2016 we argued that a global pandemic posed a significant global risk,
but with around $10 billion spent globally on preventing the worst pandemics,1 it was
more neglected than climate change or international development (which receive
hundreds of billions) — which are in turn far more neglected than education and health in
rich countries (which receive trillions).
This is important because the 1,000th person working on an issue will most likely drive
much less progress than the 10th person, an effect that economists call diminishing
returns.
1Greg Lewis estimates that a quality-adjusted ~$1 billion is spent annually on global catastrophic biorisk
(GCBR) reduction. Most of this comes from work that is not explicitly targeted at GCBRs, but is rather
disproportionally useful for reducing them. The US budget for health security in general is ~$14 billion.
Worldwide, the budget is probably something like double or triple that — so spending that’s particularly
helpful for GCBR reduction is probably just a few percent of the total; the spending for explicit GCBR
reduction would be much less. See the relevant section of ourGCBR profile, including footnote 21.

As individuals, our role should be to find the biggest gaps in the priorities served by the
current economic and political system, and do our best to fill them.
Inspired by this argument, one of our readers, Cassidy, realised that the knowledge she’d
learned as a doctor might be put to even better use in pandemic prevention.
She applied to a masters in public health programme, and from there was able to get
into a biosecurity PhD at Oxford. Since the field of pandemic control was relatively small
before COVID-19, she was able to advance quickly. When COVID-19 broke out, she was
ready to advise the UK government on policy ideas to control COVID-19, as well as how
to prevent the next (potentially much worse) outbreak.
Cassidy realised she could help more people by working on
pandemic policy than by seeing one patient at a time as a
doctor.
The importance of working on neglected issues means that following your current
passions could easily point you in the wrong direction. You’re most likely to stumble
across the same issues everyone is already talking about, which will usually be theleast
neglected. The best options are probably unconventional.
Which issues might be even more neglected than pandemics?
A survey of researchers found that they believe there’s about a 50% chance that AI
systems will exceed human capacities in most jobs around 2060. This would be one of
the most important events in history.
These same researchers also estimated that if this happened, while the outcome might
be ‘extremely good,’ there is also a 5% chance the outcome could be ‘extremely bad’
(e.g. human extinction). And as the people developing the technology, they’re probably
on the optimistic side.
One reason some are concerned is that it’s unclear that as AI systems become more
powerful, we can guarantee they’ll continue to stay aligned with human values. This
could suggest that research into ‘AI alignment’ is a crucial challenge from a long-term
perspective.

Since we first wrote about it in 2012, AI alignment has grown into a flourishing field of
research in computer science, but it still receives under $100 million in funding per year
— about 100 times less than preventing pandemics.
Long-term AIpolicy— addressing the question of how society and government should
handle advancing AI — is yet more neglected. (Read more about our case for both.)
You might be surprised at how your current skills can be applied to unusual problems like
AI alignment (and later we’ll explain how to contribute no matter your current job).
Brian Tse was working at an investment bank in Hong Kong and didn’t have a
background in AI. But he started to learn more about it in his spare time, and using his
bilingual background, started to help translate materials to connect Western and Chinese
researchers.
He now runs an independent consulting firm advising organisations in China, the United
States, and Europe on the safety and governance of AI and other potentially
transformative technologies — a path he also finds much more fulfilling and exciting than
banking.
While working in the corporate world, Brian learned about
AI and other transformative technologies. He now consults
with many key Chinese and Western organisations that work
on AI, with the aim of helping them coordinate better.
Comparing global problems is, of course, profoundly difficult. So we’ve also supported
the development of the field of global priorities research, which tries to break down and
answer the questions involved — for example, how we should allocate resources
between reducing the risk of a disaster, on the one hand, and preventing a more certain
harm on the other. There’s now an institute dedicated to this topic at Oxford. But despite
the vital importance of this research, there are still only tens of researchers directly
focused on it.
Ben Garfinkel was considering a physics PhD, but thought that since so many extremely
smart people already do physics research, it would be hard to make a big contribution.
He learned about global priorities research through a talk we gave, and after testing it

out, decided to switch fields. He then developed important criticisms of arguments for
prioritising AI.
This kind of criticism is exactly what we want to see more of. There’s a good chance our
views of which problems are most pressing are mistaken in some ways or incomplete, and
we want people to make the case for alternatives, and find issues we haven’t even
thought of yet.
You don’t have to decide on which problem to focus on right away. As we cover in our
advice on career strategy and planning, early in your career it often makes sense to focus
more on exploring and building skills. However, since your choice of problem is such an
important driver of your impact, it’s vital to think about as you go on, and especially
before you get locked into a path.
On our site, you can find a list of ideas for global problems to work on, including many
issues we didn’t have a chance to mention here. Some involve neglected ways to
improve our economic and political system and build a better society in general, as well
as ways to directly tackle risks to the future. We also have guidance on how to compare
them, and profiles about how to contribute to solving each one.
What are the best solutions to those problems?
Whatever problem you decide to focus on, you need to choose an effective way to
address it.
Scared Straight was a government programme that received billions of dollars of funding,
and was made into an award-winning documentary. The idea was to take kids who
committed crimes, show them life in jail, and scare them into embracing the straight and
narrow.
The only problem? Two meta-analyses showed that the programme made kidsmore
likely to commit crimes.2 One study even estimated that every $1 spent on this
programme caused $200 ofharm to society.
Causing this much harm is rare, but when social programmes are rigorously tested, a
large fraction of them don’t work.3 So it would be easy to end up working on a solution
that has very little impact.
2van der Put, Claudia E., et al. “Effects of awareness programs on juvenile delinquency: a three-level
meta-analysis.”International journal of offendertherapy and comparative criminology65.1 (2021): 68-91.
Archived link. Petrosino, Anthony, et al. “ScaredStraight and other juvenile awareness programs for
preventing juvenile delinquency: A systematic review.”Campbell Systematic Reviews9.1 (2013): 1-55.
Archived link
3The percentage that work or don’t work depends a lot on how you define it, but it’s likely that a
majority don’t have statistically significant effects.

Meanwhile, research finds that among solutions thatareeffective, the best interventions
arefarmore cost effective than average, often achieving 10 or 100 times as much for a
given unit of resources.
For example, in recent years there’s been a wave of advocacy to stop the use of plastic
bags.
Focusing on advocacy is a route to having much more impact than just changing your
personal consumption, but it’s unclear this advocacy is well directed. Convincing
someone to entirely give up plastic bagsfor the restof their life(about 10,000 bags)
would avoid ~0.1 tonnes of CO2 emissions. In contrast, convincing someone to take just
one fewertransatlantic flight would reduce CO2 emissions by more than 10 times as
much.4
And rather than trying to change personal consumption in the first place, we’d argue you
could do even more to reduce emissions by advocating for greater funding of neglected
green technology.
In general, it’s vital to look for thevery bestsolution in an area, rather than those that are
just ‘good’. This contrasts with the normal attitude that emphasises ‘makingadifference’,
rather than makingthe mostdifference possible.
In practice, this involves using rules of thumb to identify solutions that might make an
especially big contribution if successful — even if there’s a good chance of failure — as
well as solutions that are unfairly neglected. We call trying to identify solutions that might
be positive outliers the ‘hits-based’ approach.
Find out what experts believe are the best interventions in their fields by checking out
ourproblem profilesandpodcast interviews.
In which career can you apply the most leverage to those
solutions?
Once you’ve picked a problem to focus on and identified some promising solutions, you
need to choose a career that will let you make them happen. And some careers will let
you contribute far more resources to great solutions than others. We call this your
leverage.
People who want to have an impact often focus on jobs where they help people directly:
teaching and healthcare are two of the most common paths for college graduates. But
you might well be able to find options with more leverage.
4According to the 2020 Founders PledgeClimate & LifestyleReport, just one roundtrip transatlantic
flight contributes 1.6 tonnes of CO2. Figure 2 of the same report shows the comparatively negligible
effect of reusing plastic bags.

We worked with a doctor, Greg Lewis, to estimate the number of lives saved by a typical
clinical doctor. While the impact is significant, it’s less than commonly thought.
One reason is that the problem of health in rich countries already receives a lot of
attention compared to issues like pandemics and nuclear security. But another reason is
that a doctor can only treat a limited number of people each year. This motivated both
Greg and Cassidy (from earlier) to switch from clinical medicine to public health and
policy.
Another reader, Suzy Deuster, wanted to become a public defender to ensure
disadvantaged people have good legal defence, but she realised that while that path
might improve criminal justice for perhaps hundreds of people over her career, by
changing policy she might improve justice for thousands or even millions. She was able
to use her legal background to start a career in policy, and now works in the Executive
Office of the President on criminal justice reform, and from there can explore other areas
of policy in the future.
There are also other routes to leverage besides working in policy.
For instance, you can likely contribute more by building a community working on your
chosen problem than you could achieve directly. If you can get just one other person to
join you, then you’ve potentially doubled your impact. This means you can potentially
have a very big impact no matter your current job.
The importance of spreading neglected ideas could also suggest pursuing careers in the
media, or building any form of following. Isabelle Boemeke started out as a fashion
model, but after speaking to experts who said nuclear energy was needed to tackle
climate change, decided to use her platform to promote it as a neglected solution to
climate change.
You can have leverage by helpingsomeone elsewho has leverage, such as through
working in operations or as a personal assistant. You can also help to build organisations
which have leverage — whether nonprofit or for-profit. We list high-impact organisations
hiring people with all kinds of skills on our job board.
Another form of leverage comes from money: Donations can be targeted at the most
effective organisations in the world that are most in need of funding. Even if you have a
very specific skill set — or don’t want to change your career — by earning and donating
money, you can ‘convert’ your labour into skilled labour working on the most pressing
issues.
We call this ‘earning to give’ — finding a career that uses your strengths and allows you
to donate more, even if its direct impact is only neutral.

An extreme example is Sam Bankman-Fried. He learned about the arguments for earning
to give when he attended a talk by one of our founders while studying physics as an
undergraduate at MIT.
Through others he met in our community, Sam found a job that used his mathematical
skills in quantitative trading at Jane Street Capital, and that was a great fit. From there,
he went on to help found cryptocurrency derivatives exchange FTX. Now,Forbes
estimates his net worth is $16 billion, making him likely the world’s wealthiest person
under 30. Sam has already donated millions to causes like animal welfare and the Biden
campaign, and intends to donate most of his future wealth.
Sam took earning to give to the extreme. Going from a
physics undergrad to a pioneer in decentralised finance in
less than a decade, Sam is now worth billions — which he
plans to give away.
Over 500 of our readers are also pursuing earning to give on a more modest scale. For
example, John Yan decided that a good way for him to contribute is to stay in his current
job (software engineering) and donate 10–30% of his income to effective charities.
Collectively the contributions of these readers will add up to tens of millions of dollars of
donations, which can do a huge amount of good.
Finally, remember that leverage requires time. While many young people want to have a
big impact right away, research finds that most people reach their peak output at age
40–60.5
This means that if you don’t feel like you have much leverage now, another option is to
build what we call your ‘career capital’: skills, connections, and contributors to your
reputation that will let you have more influence in the future.
5Fatih Guvenen, Fatih Karahan, Serdar Ozkan, Jae Song.What Do Data on Millions of U.S. Workers
Reveal about Life-Cycle Earnings Risk?Staff ReportNo. 710 February 2015.Archived link
Simonton, Dean K. “Age and outstanding achievement: What do we know after a century of research?”
Psychological Bulletin104.2 (1988): 251.Archivedlink
Shane Snow. ”These are the ages when we do our best work”,Fast Company, 2016,Archived link
Jones, Benjamin, E. J. Reedy, and Bruce A. Weinberg.Age and scientific genius.No. w19866. National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.Archived link

In our guides, we coverhow to compare careers in terms of leverageandwhich options
are best for career capital, as well as alist ofideas for high-leverage pathsandcurrent
open job opportunities. If you don’t want to changeyour job right now, here’show to
invest in yourself, and how tohave a big impact inyour current position.
Personal fit: what will you be good at — and what do you actually
want to do?
“Find work you’re good at” is a truism, but we think many people still don’t take it
seriously enough.
Data shows that in many fields, success is distributed very unevenly.
A top writer, for instance, could easily have 100 times the audience of the median. So
even a small predictable difference in your suitability for two paths could translate into a
big difference in outcomes.
Another reason is that being successful in almost any field gives you more connections,
credibility, and money to direct towards neglected problems — increasing your leverage.
For both reasons, you need to balance your fit with a path with the other factors covered
above, as well as how satisfying you’d find it. We’d rarely recommend doing something
you dislike because it seems higher impact.

And if you might be exceptional at something, it could be worth pursuing, even if you’re
not sure how it’ll be useful to pressing problems. As covered in the previous section,
even if you work in finance or fashion, you can use your career to have a big impact.
So how can you predict what you’ll be best at?
Despite the importance of this question, there doesn’t seem to be much good
evidence-based advice out there.
To help fill this gap, we created guides onhow topredict your fit,what makes for a
satisfying job, and how toplan your careerover time.
Predictions can only go so far though, so while we’d encourage you to have hypotheses
about which long-term paths will be best for you, we’d also encourage an iterative
approach. Especially early in your career, you’ll learn a huge amount about your fit and
the other factors, so it’s often best to find a good step for the next 1-5 years, then
reassess your longer-term goals, then take another step, and repeat.
How much do careers differ in impact?
We’ve shown that you can have more impact by:
1. Finding a bigger and/or more neglected problem
2. Finding a more effective solution
3. Finding a path with more leverage
4. Finding work that fits you better
We’ve also shown that there are big differences for each.
But now also note that the differencesmultiply together, rather than merely add up.
For instance, if you can find a problem where additional resources are twice as effective,
and — through greater leverage — direct twice as many resources to those problems,
then you’ll have four times as much impact.
If you can find a path that’s twice as good on each dimension, it would be 16 times
higher impact in total.
And we’ve shown that despite the huge uncertainties involved, it’s plausible that some
paths are at least 10 times higher impact than others on each dimension. This means that
when multiplied together, the differences across all factors could be 100 fold or even
1,000 fold.
It’s easy to gloss over these differences in scope, but let’s appreciate for a moment just
how much they matter. It could mean saving 100 times more lives, reducing carbon

emissions 100 times as much, or making 100 times more progress reducing the biggest
risks facing humanity.
These differences are not the only ethically relevant factors, and everyone has priorities in
life besides moral ones, but they do really matter.
Another implication is that if it’s possible to find an option that’s 100 times higher impact
than your current best guess, then ten years in that path would achieve what could have
otherwise taken people like you1,000 years. You could then spend the next 30 years on
a beach doing whatever you like, and still have done far more to help others.
The potential spread also illustrates why career choice is such an important ethical
decision. We associate ‘ethical living’ with things like recycling or reducing your CO2
emissions, but even with great effort, the best you could do is cut your personal footprint
to near zero. But by thinking carefully about your career, you can affect the consumption
of hundreds or even millions of people, and also contribute to even bigger and more
neglected priorities.
How is it possible that such big differences in impact exist?
One reason is the massive economic and technological bounty of the industrial
revolution, which means that today, many ordinary citizens of rich countries have what
would have been kinglike wealth and power in previous centuries.

Advancing technology may make the next century one of the most important in history.
Our generation can wreck the climate for thousands of years, or we can build a
sustainable economy. We can continue to expand factory farming, or we can eradicate it.
We can allow new technologies like nuclear weapons to end civilisation, or we can usher
in a future better than we can easily imagine — and be good stewards for all future
generations.
Our aim is to help people like you understand this new power. If you have the good
fortune to have options about how you spend your career, you can help change the
course of history on these vital issues.
This is not an easy path, but it is a worthwhile one.
We’ve often felt racked with uncertainty about what to do, and overwhelmed at the scale
of the issues. But we’ve also found a great deal of meaning and satisfaction in our efforts,
especially as more and more people have united around them.
We still have a lot to learn, but we hope that by sharing what we’ve learned so far we can
help you avoid the mistakes we’ve made, and speed you along your path to an impactful
career.
How we can help you
We founded 80,000 Hours in 2011 to freely provide the information and support we wish
we’d had when we graduated: transparently explained, based on the best research
available, and willing to ask the big questions.
By doing this, we hope to get the next generation of leaders tackling the world’s biggest
and most neglected problems.
To date, millions of people have read our advice, and thousands of people have told us
they’ve changed careers based on it.
Here’s how you can get started right now, and improve your most important decision.
Understand how to increase your impact
Our key ideas guide aims to summarise all our research on the factors discussed in this
essay (and more), in order to help you answer the key questions that determine your
impact:
1. What does it mean to make a difference, and how can we know what helps?
2. Which global problems are most pressing?
3. Which solutions are most effective?

4. Which careers give you the most leverage?
5. Which jobs will you be good at?
6. How can you best invest in your skills?
7. What does a satisfying job look like?
8. What strategy should you take to pursue a great career?
You can also explore these ideas by subscribing to our podcast, which features in-depth
conversations with experts on the world’s most pressing problems and how you can help
solve them.
Get ideas for high-impact career paths tackling the world’s most pressing
problems
We’ve reviewed different global problems, career paths, and jobs to help you find new
ways to contribute. See:
1. A list of neglected global problems we think are especially pressing
2. Some broad types of high-leverage careers, and a list of specific career paths that
we think best contribute to the problems we highlight
3. Ideas on how to apply your existing skills to have an impact
4. How to make a big difference without changing jobs
Due to our limited capacity, our specific recommendations are aimed at college
students and graduates aged 18–30 who want to make impact their main focus —
though the principles we cover apply to everyone.
Find jobs
We have a list of current job opportunities that can let you have a big impact, or build
career capital for high-impact roles.
Join our newsletter, and we’ll send you a curated list of the top opportunities about twice
a month.
Make your career plan
When you have some ideas, check out our resources on planning and decision making,
which aim to help you feel confident in your next decision.
Our 8-week career planning course helps you tie together everything you need to
consider to make your plan and start taking action.

Get one-on-one advice
You can apply to speak to our team one-on-one for free. They can help check your plan,
and may be able to make introductions to jobs and mentors who can help you get
started.
Get help from our community
Two people working together can often achieve more than twice as much, so to help you
find collaborators, we’ve also helped to build the effective altruism movement.
Effective altruism is the study of how best to help others. It tackles similar questions to
those we’ve covered — which problems, solutions, and methods are most effective —
and expands the focus to encompass all ways of doing good, whether choosing a career,
donating, or engaging politically, while aiming to bring evidence and careful reasoning to
bear on the questions.
Besides being a field of research, effective altruism is also a movement of people trying
to put its findings into practice. There are now tens of billions of dollars committed to the
approach, and thousands of people working together to use their careers to help others.
You can get involved online, through conferences in five continents, and in hundreds of
local groups full of people keen to collaborate and help you have a greater impact.
Through the community, we’ve found some of the most impressive and dedicated
people we’ve ever met.
No time to read right now?
Join our newsletter and we’ll send you a list of our most important articles, job
opportunities, and monthly updates on new research.
You’ll be joining our community of over 150,000 people, and can unsubscribe in one
click.

2. Foundations: what does it mean to make
a difference?
What is social impact? A definition
Click to read online
Lots of people say they want to “make a difference,” “do good,” “have a social
impact,” or “make the world a better place” — but they rarely say what they mean by
those terms.
By clarifying your definition, you can better target your efforts, and make a difference
more effectively.
But howshouldyou define social impact?
Thousands of years of philosophy have gone into that question. We’re going to try to
sum up that thinking; introduce a practical, rough-and-ready definition of social impact;
and explain why we think it’s a good definition to focus on.
This is a bit ambitious for one article, so to the philosophers in the audience, please
forgive the enormous simplifications. We hope the usefulness of the definition will
make up for it.
A simple definition of social impact
If you just want a quick answer, here’s the simple version of our definition (a more
philosophically precise one — and an argument for it — follows below):
Your social impact is given by the number of people6whose lives you improve
and how much you improve them, over the long term.
This shows that you can increase your impact in two ways: by helping more people
over time, or by helping the same number of people to a greater extent (pictured
below).
6We often say “helping people” here for simplicity and brevity, but we don’t mean just humans — we
mean anyone with experience that matters morally — e.g. nonhuman animals that can suffer or feel
happiness, even conscious machines if they ever exist.

We say “over the long term” because you can help more people either by helping a
greater number now, or taking actions with better long-term effects.
This definition is enough to help you figure out what to aim at in many situations —
e.g. by roughly comparing the number of people affected by different issues. But
sometimes you need a more precise definition.
A more rigorous definition of social impact
Here’s our working definition of “social impact”:
“Social impact” or “making a difference” is (tentatively) about promoting total
expected wellbeing — considered impartially, over the long term — without
sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral importance.
In the rest of this article, we’ll expand on:
1. Why we think social impact is primarily about ‘promoting’ what’s of value — i.e.
making the world better — rather than other kinds of moral considerations.
2. Why we think making the world a better place is in large part about promoting
total expected wellbeing.
3. What we mean by “without sacrificing anything that might be of comparable
moral importance.”

4. How we can assess what makes a difference in the face of uncertainty.
We believe that taking this definition seriously has some potentially radical implications
about where people who want to do good should focus, which we also explore.
If you’re interested to understand the philosophy behind these ideas and their
implications, read on. Otherwise, you can skip to the next article in our key ideas series.
Two final notes before we start. First, our definition is tentative — in that there’s a good
chance we’re wrong and it might change. Second, its purpose is practical — it aims to
cover themost importantaspects of doing good to help people make better real-life
decisions, rather than capture everything that’s morally relevant.
In a nutshell
The definition:
“Social impact” or “making a difference” is (tentatively) about promoting total
expected wellbeing — considered impartially, over the long term — without
sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral importance.
Why “promoting”? When people say they want to “make a difference,” we think
they’re primarily talking about making the world better — i.e. ‘promoting’ good things
and preventing bad ones — rather than merely not doing unethical actions (e.g.
stealing) or being virtuous in some other way.
Why “wellbeing”? We understand wellbeing as an inclusive notion, meaning anything
that makes people better off. We take this to encompass at least promoting happiness,
health, and the ability for people to live the life they want. We chose this as the focus
because most people agree these things matter, but there are often large differences in
how much different actions improve these outcomes.
Why do we say “expected” wellbeing? We can never know with certainty the effects
that our actions will have on wellbeing. The best we can do is try to weigh the benefits
of different actions by their probability — i.e. compare based on ‘expected value.’
Note that while the action with the highest expected value is best in principle, that
doesn’t imply that the best way to find the best action is to make explicit quantitative
estimates. It’s often better in practice to use rules of thumb, our intuition, or other
methods, since these maximise expected value better than explicit expected value
calculations. (Read more on expected value.)
Why “considered impartially”? We mean that we strive to treat equal effects on
different beings’ welfare as equally morally important, no matter who they are —
including people who live far away or in the future. In addition, we think that the

interests of many nonhuman animals should be given significant weight, although we’re
unsure of the exact amount. Thus, we don’t think social impact is limited to promoting
the welfare of any particular group we happen to bepartialto (such as people who are
alive today, or human beings as a species), but is about promoting welfareimpartially.
Why do we say “over the long term”? We think that if you take an impartial
perspective, then the welfare of those who live in the future matters. Because there
could be many more future generations than those alive today, our effects on them
could be of great moral importance. We thus try to always consider not just the direct
and short-term effects of actions, but also any indirect effects that might occur in the
far future.
Why do we add “without sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral
importance”? We aren’t sure that improving welfare is the only thing that matters
morally — moral philosophers have been arguing over what matters for a long time
and it seems arrogant to assume we know the answer. Thus we think it’s important to
respect other values as well — e.g. autonomy and fairness. We find that this rarely
comes up — respecting people’s autonomy and promoting their welfare generally go
hand in hand — but if there were a conflict, we would try very hard to avoid any actions
that seem seriously wrong from one of these other common-sense perspectives.
Social impact is about making the world better
What does it mean to act ethically? Moral philosophers have debated this question for
millenia, and have arrived at three main kinds of answers:
1. Making the world better — e.g. helping others.
2. Acting rightly — e.g. respecting the rights of others and not doing wrong.
3. Being virtuous — e.g. being honest, kind, and wise.
These correspond to consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics, respectively.
We think all three perspectives have something to offer, but when our readers talk
about wanting to “make a difference,” they’re most interested in the first of these
perspectives — changing the world for the better.
We agree this focus makes sense — we don’t just want to avoid doing wrong, or live
honest lives, but actually leave the world better than we found it.
And there is a lot we can all do to get better at that.
For instance, we’ve shown that by donating 10% of their income to highly effective
charities, most college graduates can save the lives of over 40 people over their
lifetimes with a relatively minor sacrifice.

From an ethical perspective, whether you save 40 lives or not will probably be one of
the most significant questions you’ll ever face.
In our essay on your most important decision, we argued that some career paths open
to you will do hundreds of times more to make the world a better place than others. So
it seems really important to figure out what those paths are.
In contrast, it’s often a lot easier to know whether a path violates someone’s rights or
involves virtuous behaviour (most career paths seem pretty OK on those fronts), so
there’s less to gain from focusing there.
In fact, even people who emphasise moral rules and virtue agree that if you can make
others better off, that’s a good thing to do, and that it’s even better to make more
people better off than fewer. (And in general we think deontologists and utilitarians
agree a lot more than people think.)
John Rawls was one of the most influential (non-consequentialist) philosophers of the
20th century, and said:
All ethical doctrines worth our attention take consequences into account in
judging rightness. One which did not would simply be irrational, crazy.7
Since there seem to be big opportunities to make people better off, and some seem to
be better than others, we should focus on finding those.
So, while we think it’s really important to avoid harming others and to strive to act
virtuously, when it comes to real decisions, we think the potential positive
consequences are what we should focus on the most.
This might sound like common sense, but it turns out to be an unusual way to look at
things.
Much existing advice on ‘ethical careers’ is aboutavoidingworking at bad companies
rather than how we can do more good.
And discussion of ethical living more broadly typically focuses on reducing harm, rather
than how we can best do good.
For instance, when it comes to fighting climate change, there’s a lot of focus on our
personal carbon emissions, rather than figuring out what we can do tobestfight
climate change.
Asking the second question suggests radically different actions. Thebestthings we can
do to fight climate change probably involve working on, advocating for, and donating
7SeeA Theory of Justiceby John Rawls.

to exceptional research and advocacy opportunities, rather than worrying about plastic
bags, recycling, or turning out the lights.
Why is there so much focus on our personal emissions? One explanation is that
common-sense ethical thinking hasn’t caught up with the situation that modern
technology has put us in.
Our ethical views originate from before the 20th century, and sometimes from
thousands of years ago. If you were a mediaeval peasant, your main ethical priority was
to help your family survive, without cheating or harming your neighbours. You didn’t
have the knowledge, power, or time to help hundreds of people or affect the long-term
future.
The Industrial Revolution gave us wealth and technology not even available to kings
and queens in previous centuries. Now, many ordinary citizens of rich countries have
enormous power to do good, and this means the potential consequences of our
actions are usually what’s most ethically significant about them.
So, we think ‘social impact’ or ‘making a difference’ should be about making the world
better. But what does that mean?
What does it mean to make the world better?
We imagine building a world in which the most beings can have the best possible lives
in the long term — lives that are free from suffering and injustice, and full of happiness,
adventure, connection, and meaning.
There are two key components to this vision — impartiality and a focus on wellbeing —
which we’ll now unpack.
Impartiality: everyone matters equally
When it comes to ‘making a difference,’ we think we should strive to beimpartial— i.e.
to give equal weight to everyone’s interests
This means striving to avoid privileging the interests of anyone based on arbitrary
factors such as their race, gender, or nationality, as well as where or evenwhenthey
live. In addition, we think that the interests of many nonhuman animals should be given
significant weight, although we’re unsure of the exact amount.
The idea of impartiality is common in many ethical traditions, and is closely related to
the “Golden Rule” of treating others as you’d like to be treated, no matter who they
are.

Acting impartially is an ideal, and it’s not all that matters. As individuals, we all have
other personal goals, such as caring for our friends and family, carrying out our
personal projects, and having our own lives go well. Even considering only moral goals,
it’s plausible we have other values or ethical commitments beyond impartially helping
others.
We’re not saying you should abandon these other goals, and strive to treat everyone
equally in all circumstances.
Rather, the claim is thatinsofaras your goal is to ‘make a difference’ or ‘have a social
impact,’ we don’t see good reason to privilege any one group over another — and that
you should therefore havesomeconcern for the interests of strangers and other
neglected groups.
(And even if you think that the ultimate ideal is to have equal concern for all beings, as
a matter of psychology, you probably have other, competing goals, and it’s not helpful
to pretend you don’t.)
In Peter Singer’s essay,Famine, Affluence, and Morality, he imagines you’re walking
and come across a child drowning in a pond. Everyone agrees that you should run in
and save the child, even if it would ruin your new suit and shoes.
This illustrates a principle that many people can get behind: if you can help a stranger
a great deal with little cost to yourself, that’s a good thing to do. This shows that most
people givesomeweight to the interests of others.
If it also turns out that you have a lot of power to help others (as we argued above),
then it would imply that social impact should be one of the main focuses of your life.
Impartiality also implies that you should think carefully about who you can help the
most. It’s common to say that “charity begins at home,” but if everyone’s interests
matter equally, and you can help more people who are living far away (e.g. because
they’re without cheap basic necessities you can provide), then you should help the
more distant people.
We’re convinced that a degree of impartiality is reasonable, but there remains huge
questions abouthowimpartial to be.
The trend over history seems to have been towards a greater impartiality and a wider
and wider circle of concern, but we’re unsure where that should stop. For instance,
compared to people today, how should we weigh the interests of animals, people who
don’t exist yet, or even digital agents? This is called the question of moral patienthood.
Here’s an example of the stakes of this question: we don’t see much reason to discount
the interests of future generations simply because they’re distant from us in time. But

because there could be so many people in the future, the main focus of efforts to do
good should be to leave the best possible world for those future generations. This idea
has been called ‘longtermism,’ and is explored in a separate article in the key ideas
series. We think longtermism is an important perspective, which is why we say “over
the long term” in our definition of social impact.
This section was aboutwhoto help; the next section is aboutwhathelps.
Wellbeing: what does it mean to help others?
When aiming to help others, our tentative hypothesis is that we should aim to increase
their wellbeing as much as possible — i.e. enable more individuals to live flourishing
lives that are healthy, happy, fulfilled; are in line with their wishes; and are free from
avoidable suffering.
Although people disagree over whether wellbeing is the only thing that matters
morally, almost everyone agrees that things like health and happiness matter a lot —
and so we think it should be a central focus in efforts to make a difference.
Putting impartiality and a focus on wellbeing together means that, roughly, how much
positive difference an action makes depends on how it increases the wellbeing of those
affected, and how many are helped — no matter when or where they live.
What wellbeing consists of more precisely is a controversial question, which you can
read about in this introduction by Fin Moorhouse. In brief, there are three main views:
● The hedonic view: wellbeing consists in your degree of positive vs negative
mental states such as happiness, meaning, discovery, excitement, connection,
and equanimity.
● The preference satisfaction view: wellbeing consists in your desires being
fulfilled.
● Objective list theories: wellbeing consists in achieving certain goods, like
friendship, knowledge, and health.
In philosophical thought experiments, these different views have very different
implications. For instance, if you support the hedonic view, you’d need to accept that
being secretly placed into a virtual reality machine that generates amazing experiences
is better for you than staying in the real world. If instead you support (or just have some
degree of belief in) the preference satisfaction view, you don’t have to accept this
implication, because your desires can include not being deceived and achieving things
in the real world.
In practical situations, however, we rarely find that different views of wellbeing drive
different decisions, such as about which global problems to focus on. The three notions

correlate closely enough that differences in views are usually driven by other factors
(such as the question of where to draw the boundaries of the expanding circle
discussed in the previous section).
What else might matter besides wellbeing? There are many candidates, which is why
we say promoting wellbeing is only a “tentative” hypothesis.
Preserving the environment enables the planet to support more beings with greater
wellbeing in the long term, and so is also good from the perspective of promoting
wellbeing. However, some believe that we should preserve the environment even if it
doesn’t make life better for any sentient beings, showing they placeintrinsicvalue on
preserving the environment.
Others think we should place intrinsic value on autonomy, fairness, knowledge, and
many other values.
Fortunately, promoting these other values often goes hand in hand with promoting
wellbeing, and there are often common goals that people with many values can share,
such as avoiding existential risks. So again, we believe that the weight people put on
these different values has less effect on what to do than often supposed, although they
can lead to differences in emphasis.
We’re not going to be able to settle the question of defining everything that’s of moral
value in this article, but we think that promoting wellbeing is a good starting point — it
captures much of what matters and is a goal that almost everyone can get behind.
How good is it to create a happy person?
We’ve mostly spoken above as if we’re dealing with potential effects on a fixed
population, but some decisions could result in more people existing in the long term
(e.g. deflecting an asteroid), while others mainly benefit people who already exist (e.g.
treating people with parasitic worms, which rarely kill people but cause a lot of
suffering). So we need to compare the value of increasing the number of people with
positive wellbeing with benefiting those who already exist.
This question is studied by the field of ‘population ethics’ and is an especially new and
unsettled area of philosophy.
We won’t try to summarise this huge topic here, but our take is that the most plausible
view is that we should maximise total wellbeing — i.e. the number of people (again
including all beings whose lives matter morally) who exist in all of history, weighted by
their level of wellbeing. This is why we say “total” wellbeing in the definition.

That said, there are some powerful responses to this position, which we briefly sketch
out in the article on longtermism. For this reason, we’re not certain of this ‘totalist’
view, and so put some weight on other perspectives.
Expected value: acting under uncertainty
How do you know what will increase wellbeing the most? In short, you don’t.
You have to weigh up the different likelihoods of different outcomes, and act even
though you’re uncertain. We believe the theoretical ideal here is to take the action with
the greatest expected value compared to the counterfactual. This means taking into
account both how much wellbeing our actions could result in, and how likely those
outcomes are, and adding them together.
In practice, we try to approximate this with rules of thumb, like the importance,
neglectedness, tractability framework.
Going into expected value theory would take us too far afield, so if you want to learn
more, check out our separate articles:
● Expected value: how to act when you’re uncertain what will help?
● Counterfactuals and how they change our view of what does good
● How much risk to take if you want to do good?
● Cluelessness: can we know the effects of our actions?
Why do we say “without sacrificing anything that might be of
comparable moral importance”?
In our definition, we say social impact is about promoting wellbeing, but we also add
“without sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral importance.”
The purpose of this clause is to remind us of how much could be left out of our
definition, and how radical our uncertainty is.
Many moral views that were widely held in the past are regarded as flawed or even
abhorrent today. This suggests we should expect our own moral views to be flawed in
ways that are difficult for us to recognise.
There is still significant moral disagreement within society, among contemporary moral
philosophers, and, indeed, within our own team.
And past projects aiming to pursue an abstract ethical ideal to the exclusion of all else
have often ended badly.

The “without sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral importance”
clause is a shorthand for the idea that we should:
● Consider a range of ethical perspectives, and take actions that seem good
based on many perspectives
● Respect others’ values and be willing to compromise with them
● Respect our other important personal priorities, like family, personal projects,
and our own wellbeing
● Be very cautious about doing anything that seems obviously wrong according to
common sense
We think everyone has reason to be “morally uncertain” and so support these
principles. You can read more about this in our separate articles:
● Is it ever okay to take a harmful job in order to do more good?
● Moral uncertainty: how to act when you’re uncertain about what’s good
● Coordination: why to respect other people’s values (even if you think they’re
wrong)
● Ways people trying to do good accidentally make things worse, and how to
avoid them
Is this just utilitarianism?
No. Utilitarianism claims that you’re morally obligated to take the action that does the
most to increase wellbeing, as understood according to the hedonic view.
Our definition shares an emphasis on wellbeing and impartiality, but we depart from
utilitarianism in that:
● We don’t make strong claims about what’s morally obligated. Mainly, we believe
that helping more people is better than helping fewer. If we were to make a
claim about what weoughtto do, it would be that we should help others when
we can benefit them a lot with little cost to ourselves, which is much weaker than
utilitarianism.
● Our view is compatible with also putting weight on other notions of wellbeing,
other moral values (e.g. autonomy), and other moral principles. In particular, we
don’t endorse harming others for the greater good.
● We’re very uncertain about the correct moral theory and try to put weight on
multiple perspectives.
Read more about how effective altruism is different from utilitarianism.

Overall, many of the team don’t identify as being straightforward utilitarians or
consequentialists.
Our main position isn’t that people should be more utilitarian, but that they should pay
more attention to consequences — and especially to the large differences in the scale
of the consequences of different actions — than they do.
If one career path might save hundreds of lives, and another won’t, we should all be
able to agree that matters.
In short, we think ethics should be more scope sensitive.
Conclusion
We’re not sure what it means to make a difference, but we think our definition is a
reasonable starting point that many people should be able to get behind:
“Social impact” or “making a difference” is (tentatively) about promoting
expected wellbeing — considered impartially, over the long term — without
sacrificing anything that might be of comparable moral importance.
We’ve also gestured at how social impact might fit with your personal priorities and
what else matters ethically, as well as many of our uncertainties about the definition —
which can have a big effect on where to focus.
We think one of the biggest questions is whether to accept longtermism, so we’ve
dedicated the next article to that question.
From there, you can start to explore which global problems are most pressing based on
whatever definition of social impact you think is correct.
You’ll most likely find that the question of which global problems to focus on is more
driven by empirical or methodological uncertainties than moral ones. But if you find a
moral question is crucial, you can come back and explore the further reading below.
In short, if you have the extraordinary privilege to be a college graduate in a rich
country and to have options for how to spend your career, it’s plausible that social
impact, as defined in this way, should be one of your main priorities. How to act on
that priority effectively is the focus of the rest of the key ideas series.
Further reading on how to define social impact
● Podcast: Prof Will MacAskill on moral uncertainty, utilitarianism, and how to
avoid being a moral monster

● A thread on why deontologists and utilitarians agree more than people think
● Radical Empathy by Holden Karnofsky
● The Expanding Circle: Ethics and Sociobiologyby Peter Singer
● What is wellbeing? by Fin Moorhouse
● Impartiality on the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
● A reading list on moral patienthood on the Effective Altruism Forum
Longtermism: the moral significance of future
generations
Click to read online
Most people think we should have some concern for future generations, but this
obvious sounding idea can lead to a surprising conclusion.
Since the future might be very long, there could be far more people in future
generations than in the present generation. This means that if you want to make the
world better in animpartialway — i.e. without regard to people’s race, class, or where
orwhenthey’re born — then what most matters morally is that the future goes as well
as it can for all generations to come. We’ve called this the ‘long-term value thesis.’
When this thesis is also combined with the idea that some of our actions can have
non-negligible effects on how the future goes, it implies that one of our biggest
priorities should be ensuring the future goes well. This further idea is usually called
‘longtermism.’ Most of this article is about the long-term value thesis, but it comes
back to whether we can affect the future at the end.
The long-term value thesis is often confused with the claim that we shouldn’tdo
anything to help people in the present generation. But the thesis is about what most
matters— what we shoulddoabout it is a further question. If it turned out that the
best way to help those in the future is to improve the lives of people in the present,
such as through providing health and education, then longtermists would focus on
that. The difference is that the biggestreasonto help those in the present would be to
improve the long term.
The arguments for and against longtermism are a fascinating new area of research.
Many of the key advances have been made by philosophers who have spent time in
Oxford, like Derek Parfit, Nick Bostrom, Nick Beckstead, Hilary Greaves, and Toby Ord.
We’ve found it interesting to watch them deepen and refine these arguments over the
last 10 or so years, and we think longtermism might well turn out to be one of the most
important discoveries of effective altruism so far.

In the rest of this article, you can see a one-page introduction to longtermism in a
nutshell, then we give an overview of the main arguments for and against the
long-term value thesis, discuss three common objections, and finish by briefly
discussing whether we can affect the future and what longtermism might imply.
If you prefer a book, Dr Toby Ord, an Oxford philosopher and 80,000 Hours trustee,
has recently publishedThe Precipice: ExistentialRisk and the Future of Humanity,
which gives an overview of the moral importance of future generations, and what we
can do to help them today. We'll send you a free copy when you subscribe to our
newsletter!
If you prefer to start with a video, this presentation by Joseph Carlsmith is also a good
introduction.
Longtermism in a nutshell
The average mammalian species lasts for about one million years. Homo sapiens have
been around for only 200,000. With the benefit of technology and foresight, civilisation
could, in principle, survive for at least as long as the earth is habitable — probably
around 600–800 million years more.8
Given that we can’t rule out this possibility, this means that there will, in expectation,
be a huge number of future generations. There could also be a much larger number of
people in each future generation, and their lives could be much better than ours.
We think future generations clearly matter, and impartial concern most likely implies
their interests matter as much as anyone’s.9
If we care aboutallthe consequences of our actions, then what’s most important about
our actions from an impartial perspective is their potential effects on these future
generations.
If this reasoning is correct, it would imply that approaches to improving the world
should be evaluated mainly in terms of their potential long-term impact, over
thousands, millions, or even billions of years.
In other words, the question “How can I have a positive impact?” should mostly be
replaced with “How can I best make the very long-term future go well?” These
8And if humanity finds a way to flourish outside of Earth, civilisation could last far longer still.
9Technically, another claim is needed to complete this argument. We must say that others’ interests
matter regardless of their ‘modal status’ — roughly whether an individual would exist ‘no matter what we
do’ or ‘might exist or might not exist depending on our actions.’ People who believe that this is an
important moral difference often hold a ‘person-affecting view.’ We’ve given some reasons we disagree
with the person-affecting view in ourarticle on futuregenerations.

arguments and their implications are studied as part of an emerging school of thought
calledlongtermism.
We feel relatively confident about this idea, but we’re not confident about what it
implies in practice.
An obvious response to the above is that it’s so difficult to predict the very long-term
effects of our actions that although these effects might be very important, we don’t
know what they are. Instead, this response goes, we should focus on helping people in
the short-term where we can have more confidence in their positive effects.
We agree it’s very hard to know the long-term effects of our actions; however, as
discussed above, we think we should aim to use whatever evidence and theory is
available to make the best possible estimates of the expected value of different
actions. Moreover, because the expected number of future generations is so great, our
actions only need to have non-negligible effects on them for these effects to dominate
their expected value.
In practice, we think therearesome actions that potentially have very long-term
positive effects. For example, we can take steps to make it less likely that civilisation
ends through a disaster like nuclear war, which would irreversibly deprive future
generations of the chance to flourish. We cover other examples in the next section.
Let’s explore some hypothetical numbers to illustrate the general concept. If there’s a
5% chance that civilisation lasts for ten million years, then in expectation, there are over
5,000 future generations. If thousands of people making a concerted effort could, with
a 55% probability, reduce the risk of premature extinction by 1 percentage point, then
these efforts would in expectation save 28 future generations. If each generation
contains ten billion people, that would be 280 billion additional individuals who get to
live flourishing lives. If there’s a chance civilisation lasts longer than ten million years, or
that there are more than ten billion people in each future generation, then the
argument is strengthened even further.
Even if we’re not sure what actions would help today, longtermism would likely imply
that our key focus should be on carrying out research to identify these actions, or
otherwise making society better able to tackle long-term challenges.
In contrast, we don’t see much reason to expect that actions with good short-term
effects will also be those that will be best from a long-term perspective.
Another major reason why we think it’s worth taking longtermism seriously is that future
generations lack any economic or political power, which means we should expect their
interests to be neglected by our current institutions. Within philanthropy, too, very little
attention is paid to the interests of those who might live more than 100 years in the

future. This all suggests that outstanding opportunities to help may remain untaken,
and that it would be reasonable for society to allocate significantly more attention to
these issues.
We remain unsure about many of these arguments, but overall we’re persuaded that
focusing more on the very long-term effects of our actions is our best bet for now.
Why think the future matters more than the present?
What are the things you most value in human civilisation today? People being happy
and free of suffering? People fulfilling their potential? Knowledge? Art?
In almost all of these cases, there’s potentially a lot more of it to come in the future:
1. The Earth could remain habitable for 600–800 million years,10 so there could be
about 21 million future generations,11 and if we do the needed work, they could
lead great lives — whatever you think ‘great’ consists of. Even if you don’t think
future generations matter as much as the present generation, since there could
be so many of them, they could still be our key concern.
2. Civilisation could also eventually reach other planets — there are 100 billion
planets in the Milky Way alone.12 So, even if there’s only a small chance of this
happening, there could also be dramatically more peopleper generationthan
there are today. By reaching other planets, civilisation could also last even
longer than if we stay on the Earth.
3. If you think it’s good for people to live happier and more flourishing lives, there’s
a possibility that technology and social progress will let people have much
better and longer lives in the future (including people in the present generation).
So, putting these first three points together, there could be many more
generations, with far more people, with the potential to be living much better
lives. The three dimensions multiply together to give the potential scale of the
future.
4. It seems possible that the future could contain far more of the other things
humans value, including beauty, justice, and knowledge.13
5. If you greatly value artistic and intellectual achievement, a far wealthier and
bigger civilisation could have far greater achievements than our own.
10800 million years from now: “Carbon dioxide levels fall to the point at which C4 photosynthesis is no
longer possible. Free oxygen and ozone disappear from the atmosphere. Multicellular life dies out.”
Archived link, retrieved 22-October-2017.
11Assuming 3 generations per 100 years.
12The Milky Way Contains at Least 100 Billion PlanetsAccording to Survey, Hubblesite,
Archived link, retrieved 22-October-2017
13Though some forms of justice and virtue focused ethics might not hold that we ought tomaximise
justice or virtue; instead, for instance, it may be a matter of satisfying a set of conditions.

And so on.
This suggests that, insofar as you care about making the world a better place, your key
concern should be whether the future goes well or badly.
This isn’t to deny that you have special obligations to your friends and family, and an
interest in your own life going well. We’re only talking about what matters insofar as
you care about helping others impartially — philosophers often call this what matters
“from the point of view of the universe.” We think everyone should care about the lives
of all others in this senseto some degree, even if you care about other things as well.
People often assume the long-term value thesis is especially about the possibility of
there being lots ofpeoplein the future, and so only of interest to a narrow range of
ethical views (especially total utilitarianism), but as we can see in the list above, it’s
actually much broader. It just rests on the idea that ifsomethingis of value, it’s better to
have more of what’s valuable rather than less, and that it’s possible to have much more
of it in the future. This might include non-welfare values, such as beauty or knowledge.
The arguments are also not about humans; rather, they concern whatever agents in the
future might have moral value, including other species.
People also often think that the long-term value thesis assumes the future will have
positive rather than negative value. Quite the opposite is true — the future could also
contain far more suffering than the present, and this implieseven moreconcern for
how it unfolds. It’s important to reduce the probability of bad futures as well as increase
the probability of good ones.
You can see a more rigorous presentation of the arguments in Chapter 3 ofOn the
Overwhelming Value of Shaping the Far Future, by Nick Beckstead.
Now let’s consider three of the most common objections to the long-term value thesis.
1. Will the future actually be big?
The argument relies on the possibility of there being much more value in the future.
But you might doubt that civilisation can actually survive very long, or that we will ever
live on other planets, or that people’s lives can be much better or worse than those of
people today.
There’s a lot of reason to doubt these claims. Let’s look at them in a little more depth.
First, what’snotup for debate is thepossibilitythat the future could be big. It’s a widely
accepted scientific position that the Earth could remain habitable for hundreds of
millions of years, and that there are at least a hundred billion planets in the galaxy.
What’s more, there’s no reason to think it’s impossible that civilisation could discover far

more powerful technology than we have today, or that people could live far better and
more satisfying lives than they do today.
Rather, what’s in doubt is thelikelihoodthat these developments come to pass.
Unfortunately there is no definitive way to estimate this likelihood. The best we can do
is to weigh the arguments for and against a big future, and make our best estimates.
If you think that civilisation is virtually guaranteed to end in the next couple of hundred
years, then the future won’t have much more value than the present. However, if you
think there’s a 5% chance that civilisation survives 10 million generations till the end of
the Earth,14 then (in expectation) there will be over 500,000 future generations. This
means the future is at least 500,000 times ‘bigger’ than the present. This could happen
if there’s a chance civilisation reaches a stable state where the risk of extinction
becomes low.
In general, the bigger you think the future could be, and the more likely you think we
are to get there, the greater the value.
Further, if you’reuncertainwhether the future will be big, then a top priority should be
tofigure outwhether it will be — it would be the most important moral discovery you
could make. So, even if you’re not sure you directly should act on the thesis, it might
still be the most important area for research. We see this kind of research as extremely
important.
2. What about discounting?
Sometimes at this point people, especially those trained in economics, mention
“discounting” as a reason to not care about the long term.
When economists compare benefits in the future to benefits in the present, they
typically reduce the value of the future benefits by some amount called the ‘discount
factor.’ A typical social discount rate might be 1% per year, which means that benefits
in 100 years are only worth 36% as much as benefits today, and benefits in 1,000 years
are worth almost nothing.
To understand whether this is a valid response, you need to consider why the concept
of discounted benefits was invented in the first place.
There are good reasons to discounteconomicbenefits. One reason is that if you
receive money now, you can invest it, and earn a return each year. This means it’s
better to receive money now rather than later. People in the future might also be
wealthier, which means that money is less valuable to them.
14Sometimes people object that this is a “Pascal’s wager” type argument, but a 10% chance is typically
larger than is used in these arguments, and the supposed future value is still finite rather than infinite.

However, these reasons don’t obviously apply to welfare — people having good lives.
You can’t directly “invest” welfare today and get more welfare later, like you can with
money. The same seems true for other intrinsic values, such as justice.
There are other reasons to discount welfare,15 and this is a complex debate. However,
the bottom line is that almost every philosopher who has worked on the issue doesn’t
think we should discount theintrinsic valueof welfare — i.e. from the point of view of
the universe, one person’s happiness is worth just the same amount no matter when it
occurs.
Indeed, if you suppose we can discount welfare, we can easily end up with conclusions
that sound absurd. For instance, a 3% discount rate would imply that the suffering of
one person today was equal to the suffering of 16 trillion people in 1,000 years.
As Derek Parfit said:
Why should costs and benefits receive less weight, simply because they are
further in the future? When the future comes, these benefits and costs will be no
less real. Imagine finding out that you, having just reached your twenty-first
birthday, must soon die of cancer because one evening Cleopatra wanted an
extra helping of dessert. How could this be justified?
If we reject the discounting of welfare and other intrinsic values, then the chance that
there could be a great deal of value in the future is still important. Moreover, this
doesn’t stand in tension with the economic practice of discounting monetary benefits.
If you’d like to see a more technical discussion of these issues, seeDiscounting for
Climate Changeby Hilary Graves. There is a more accessible discussion at 1h00m50s in
our podcast with Toby Ord and in Chapter 4 ofStubbornAttachmentsby Tyler Cowen.
3. Do we have moral obligations to future generations?
A final response is that although the future might be big, we’re not obligated to help
people who don’t yet exist in the same way as we’re obligated to help people alive
right now.
This objection is usually associated with a “person-affecting” view of ethics, which is
sometimes summed up as the view that “Ethics is about helping make people happy,
not making happy people.” In other words, we only have moral obligations to help
those who are already alive, and not to enable more people to exist with good lives.
15For instance, we might discount welfare due to uncertainty about whether it will happen, but we’ve
already taken uncertainty about the future into account when estimating its expected value.
We might also discount welfare in practice, since having happy people now might be thought to
produce more happy people in the future.

You can see where this intuition comes from if you consider the following choice: is it
better to cure one person who’s 60 years old of cancer and allow them to live to 80, or
to bring one new person into existence who will live a good life for 80 years? Most
people think we should help the 60 year old, even though the new person gains four
times as much good life.
However, person-affecting views suffer from a number of problems. For instance,
suppose you have the option to bring into existence someone who would not
otherwise have existed, whose life involves severe and constant suffering from birth
until death, and who wished they had never been born.
Nearly everyone agrees this is a bad thing to do. A naive person-affecting view,
however, says that, since it involves creating a new person, this lies outside of our
ethical concern, and so is neither good nor bad. So, the person-affecting view conflicts
with the obvious idea that we shouldn’t create the suffering life.
Person-affecting views can avoid this conflict by positing that it’s bad to create lives
filled with suffering, but it’s neither good nor bad to createhappylives. Then, it’s wrong
to create the suffering-filled life, but there’s no reason to enable more happy people to
exist in the future.
One issue with this is that it’s unclear why this asymmetry would exist. The bigger
problem though is that this asymmetry conflicts with another common sense idea.
Suppose you have the choice to bring into existence one person with an amazing life,
or another person whose life is barely worth living, but still more good than bad.
Clearly, it seems better to bring about the amazing life, but if creating a happy life is
neither good nor bad, then we have to conclude that both options are neither good
nor bad. This implies both options are equally good, which seems bizarre.
This is a complex debate, and rejecting the person-affecting view also has
counterintuitive conclusions. For instance, if you agree that it’s good to create people
whose lives are more good than bad, then you’ll need to accept that we could have a
better world filled with a huge number of people whose lives are just barely worth
living. This is called the “repugnant conclusion.”
Our view, however, is that it’s better to reject the person-affecting view. You can see a
summary of the arguments in this public lecture by Hilary Greaves (based on this paper)
and in Chapter 4 ofOn the Overwhelming Importanceof Shaping the Far Futureby
Nick Beckstead. It’s also discussed in our podcast with Toby Ord.16
16It’s also been argued thateven ifyou take a person-affectingapproach, you might still think that the
future is more important than the present. This is because some people who are alive today might be
able to live a very long time, and have much higher levels of welfare than they do today. Rather than

What’s our position? As stated, we find the criticisms of the person-affecting view
persuasive, so don’t find it a convincing response to the long-term value thesis.
However, since many people hold something like the person-affecting view, we think it
deserves some weight, and that means we should act as if we have somewhat greater
obligations to help someone who’s already alive compared to someone who doesn’t
exist yet. (This is an application of moral uncertainty).
Likewise, we think there might be other types of ethical reasons to have additional
concern for the present. For instance, maybe the unique nature of injustice means we
haveextrareasons to fight great injustices being perpetrated today. (Though there
may also be reasons of justice to make sure the interests of future generations aren’t
ignored.)
However, these reasons to place special value on the present need to be set against
the potentially far greater amount of value in the future. How to do this is an extremely
difficult question, and involves unsettled questions in the study of moral uncertainty.
Trying to weigh this up, we think we should have far greater concern for the future,
though we care more about the present generation than we would if we naively
weighed up the numbers.
So, is there much more value in the future?
We think the original argument survives the responses, and so, when it comes to doing
good, our key concern is how the long-term unfolds.
That said, we’re still highly uncertain about these arguments. There’s a good chance
we’ve missed a crucial consideration and this picture is wrong. These ideas are still new
and have not been heavily studied. We’re also uncertain how to weigh the value of the
future against other moral concerns given moral uncertainty.
This makes us cautious to putoverwhelmingvalue on the future, even if that’s what the
raw numbers might imply. Instead, we see making the future go well as our key, but
not only, moral concern.
We also place a great amount of value on learning more about these issues to refine
our priorities, and we attach importance to many other moral demands.
Can we actually influence the future?
You might be persuaded by these arguments, but believe they are irrelevant because
we can’t significantly impact the future. It’s natural to think that the overall effects of our
create more people, your key concern should be to ensure that these possibilities are realised. So, even
if you have a person-affecting view, the long-term value thesis might still hold.

actions on the future are unknowable. If so, you might accept the long-term value
thesis but reject longtermism, and instead believe that the best we can do is help
people in the short term.
However, we think there are ways we can impact the future:
1. We can speed up processes that impact the future. Our economy tends to grow
every year, and this suggests that if we make society wealthier today, this wealth
will compound, making future people wealthier.
2. More significantly, we could precipitate the end of civilisation, perhaps through
a nuclear war, run-away climate change, engineered pandemics, or other
disasters. This would foreclose the possibility of all future value. It seems like
there are things the current generation can do to increase or decrease the
chance of extinction, as we cover in our problem profiles.
3. There might be other major, irreversible changes besides extinction that we can
influence, which could either be positive or negative. For instance, if a
totalitarian government came into power that couldn’t be overthrown, the
badness of that government would be locked-in for a very long-time. If we could
decrease the chance of that happening, that would be very good, and vice
versa. Alternatively, genetic engineering might make it possible to
fundamentally change human values, and then these values would be passed
down to every future generation. This could either be very good or very bad,
depending on your moral views and how it was done.
4. Even if you’re not sure how to help the future, then your key aim could be to do
researchto work it out. We’re uncertain about lots of ways to help people, but
that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t try. This is part of global priorities research, and
there are plenty of concrete questions to investigate.
You can see more detail on the different ways to shape the future in Chapter 3 ofOn
the Overwhelming Importance of Shaping the Far Future.
What’s the practical upshot of these possibilities?
If you think there’s a huge amount of value in the future, and there are
not-ridiculously-small ways we can affect it, then these actions will be the
highest-impact we can take. Nick Beckstead calls this the “future-shaping argument.”
In fact, it turns out that many of the ways to help future generations are also highly
neglected. This is exactly what you’d expect — the present generation has a much
greater interest in helping itself rather than improving the future.
Future generations can’t buy things, so lack economic power. They lack any political
representation, and depend entirely on our generosity towards them. And because we
never see the effects of our actions, even people who want to make a difference often

neglect them. Within philanthropy, too, very little attention is paid to the interests of
those who might live more than 100 years in the future.
This all suggests that outstanding opportunities to help may remain untaken, and that
it would be reasonable for society to allocate significantly more attention to these
issues.
You can read more about objections to longtermism and responses in this article.
What are the best ways to help future generations right now?
This is a topic for another article, but here is a very quick outline of our views.
One area thatdoesn’tseem to be the top priority is speeding up progress. In terms of
importance, Beckstead argues in Chapter 3 of his thesis (expanding on Nick Bostrom’s
original paper, Astronomical Waste) that from a long-term perspective, what matters
most is where we end up, not how fast we get there, so speed-ups are less important
than changes that alter the long-term trajectory.
Second, efforts to speed up progress are also far less neglected than other ways to
help the future — the world spends about one trillion dollars a year on R&D, and a lack
of neglect is what we should expect, since these discoveries also benefit the present
generation.
Instead, what’s most important are “path changes” — actions that have the potential to
shape the future over a very long timescale. (You could argue that speeding up
progress will result in a path change, but the path change is where most of the value
is.)
The main question is then which types of path change we should focus on?
The clearest example of a priority today seems to be reducing existential risks.
There is a small but real possibility that civilisation ends in the next century; and this
would not only be terrible for the present generation, it would permanently remove the
possibility of a good future. We need to get these risks down before we can focus on
other ways of improving the future. What’s more, there are many concrete, highly
neglected proposals to reduce these risks.
Read more about the arguments for focusing on existential risks, which apply even if
you’re mainly focused on the present generation, but even more so if you accept the
long-term value thesis.
Not everyone focused on longtermism thinks we should focus on directly reducing
specific existential risks. Some think we should try to shape emerging technologies to

increase the chance they go well (as well as reduce risks), others think we should focus
on making society generally better able to navigate challenges (since perhaps we don’t
know what the biggest risks are), and yet others think we should focus on building the
resources of those concerned about longtermism in the future, so they’re in a better
position to act compared to us — this is called patient longtermism. We discuss these
options more in a podcast with Benjamin Todd.
We’re also deeply unsure about all of these suggestions, so our other focus is on global
priorities research to identify the best ways to help the future. This includes the
question of whether there might be positive path changes to promote (sometimes
called “existential hope”), as well as what negative risks are most important to avoid.
There might also be crucial considerations that might overturn longtermism. We think
this research could have a significant impact on our priorities, and there’s also only a
handful of researchers currently doing it.
The stakes facing our generation are much more than they first seem. Our actions
might have the potential to bring about a far better world, or cut it short. Our key
concern should be to ensure the future goes well.
Want to focus your career on the long-run future?
If you want to work on any issues essential to ensuring the future goes well, such as
controlling nuclear weapons or shaping the development of artificial intelligence or
biotechnology, you can speak to our team one-on-one.
We’ve helped hundreds of people choose an area to focus, make connections, and
then find jobs and funding in these areas. If you’re already in one of these areas, we
can help you maximise your impact within it.
Further reading
● Moral uncertainty: how to act when you’re uncertain about what’s good
● Chapters 1-4On the Overwhelming Importance of Shapingthe Far Futureby
Nick Beckstead. This thesis builds upon a seminal paper by Nick Bostrom,
Astronomical Waste, which makes the argument that the future has
overwhelming value for utilitarians, as well asExistentialRisk Prevention as a
Global Priority.
● A more recent and systematic academic treatment of the topic can be found
here: The Case for Strong Longtermism, by Hilary Greaves and Will MacAskill.
● Dr Nick Beckstead also discusses his thesis in our podcast.
● Dr Toby Ord discusses these arguments in his book,The Precipice.
● Dr Toby Ord also explores many of these arguments with us in another podcast.

● Benjamin Todd and Arden Koehler discuss varieties of longtermism in this
podcast.
● Our podcast with Alexander Berger presents a case for focusing instead on
near-term gains in global health and wellbeing.
● In this podcast, Holden Karnofsky talks about the case that we’re living in the
most important century. And in a blog post,Are weliving at the most influential
time in history?, Dr Will MacAskill responds with counterarguments.
● This could be the most important century.
● Why despite global progress, humanity is probably facing its most dangerous
time ever.
● Fifty-one policy and research ideas for reducing existential risk.
● Carl Shulman on the common-sense case for existential risk work and its
practical implications.
● An alternative introduction to longtermism, which goes through somewhat
different objections and reasoning.
Effective altruism
Click to read online
It sounds obvious that it’s better to help two people than one if the cost is the same.
However, when applied to the world today, this obvious-sounding idea leads to
surprising conclusions.
In short, we believe we need a new approach to having an impact: effective altruism.
Modern levels of wealth and technology have given some members of the present
generation potentially enormous abilities to help others, while our common-sense
views of what it means to be a good person have not caught up with this change.
This means that some actions that are widely considered to ‘do good’ have
dramatically greater positive consequences than others.
For instance, the UK’s National Health Service and many US government agencies are
willing to spend over $30,000 to give someone an extra year of healthy life.17 This is a
great use of resources by ordinary standards.
However, research by GiveWell has found that it’s possible to give an infant a year of
healthy life by donating around $100 to one of the most cost-effective global health
17“Below a most plausible ICER of £20,000 per QALY gained, the decision to recommend the use of a
technology is normally based on the cost-effectiveness estimate and the acceptability of a technology as
an effective use of NHS resources.” FromGuide tothe methods of technology appraisal 2013,by the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.Archived link

charities, such as the Against Malaria Foundation (AMF). This is about 0.33% as much.
This suggests that at least in terms of improving health, one career working somewhere
like AMF might achieve as much as 300 careers focused on typical ways of doing good
in a rich country.
These kinds of health programmes offer such a good opportunity to do good that even
the most prominent aid sceptics have offered few arguments against them.
This is not unique to health programmes. When we’ve looked at other ways of doing
good, this pattern tends to be replicated: the most effective ways to help usually seem
much better than what’s typical. For instance:
● Among ways individuals can combat climate change, there are huge differences
in how much different actions reduce CO2.
● Within US social programmes, the most cost effective are far more effective than
the median.
● Within politics, the best get out the vote methods work far better than typical
ones.
Indeed, many social programmes have little impact at all, which by itself creates a
significant difference between the best and typical.
In our own work, we’ve argued that the impact of different career paths depends on:
● How pressing the problems you work on are
● How effective the solutions you support are
● How much leverage you can apply to those solutions
● Your degree of personal fit with the path
And in the rest of the key ideas series, we argued that the best vs. typical options
within each factor often seem to vary by a factor of 10 and sometimes a lot more (i.e.
the paths with the most leverage open to you have more than 10 times the leverage of
a more typical option, the most effective solutions make 10 times more progress on the
problem per year of work, etc.). And since the overall impact of a career is given by the
multiple of the four factors, the total variation in impact is even larger.
This wide spread of outcomes is also probably what we should expect to find.
A trait like height follows a ‘normal’ distribution: the tallest people are only about 50%
taller than the average. A trait like income, however, follows a ‘fat tail’ distribution: the
highest-earning people earn thousands of times more than average. This concept has
been popularised as the ‘80/20 principle’ — which says that 80% of outcomes are
caused by 20% of events — or as the idea that outcomes are dominated by ‘black swan
events.’

We expect that the distribution of the expected impact of different actions is more
likely to be like income than height.
One reason for this is that if the outcomes of different actions are caused by the
multiplication of several factors — as they often are — then the value of different
actions will end up as a heavy-tailed distribution (technically, a log-normal distribution).
This is the pattern we see where we have good data. For instance, the cost
effectiveness of ways to improve health in poor countries (measured with ‘cost per year
of healthy life’) closely follows an 80/20 distribution.
Research by Open Philanthropy finds a similar pattern in other areas.
This means that if your aim is to impartially help others, and all else equal you’d prefer
to help more people, your key concern shouldn’t just be to ‘make a difference’ — it
should be to identify thevery bestways to help among the options open to you.
This idea might sound obvious, but when we surveyed people on how much more
effective they think the best charities are compared to the median, a typical response
was that the best charities are only 66% more effective; whereas instead it seems like
the difference is more like 10,000%. So, the difference between the best and typical
ways of helping are much larger than ordinarily supposed.
This idea also has some radical implications.

One big implication is that it means that people who want to do good could achieve
far more than they do today, simply by paying more attention to the effectiveness of
their options.
For instance, if some ways of doing good achieve 100 times as much as others, then
we could be making 100 times as much progress on global problems without using any
more resources. Or to put it another way, it would be like increasing the number of
people focused on doing good by 100 times.
As an individual, it really seems possible to save the lives of tens of others, or even to
play a role in reducing the risk of the end of civilisation or shaping the most important
century.
Perhaps an even bigger implication is that we need to rethink what it means to be a
good person.
Our ethics are very focused on not doing wrong, rather than doingmoregood. This
made sense in a pre-modern world where we didn’t have much power to do good. But
today it’s missing the most important part of the picture.
This is clear in discussions of climate change, where most attention is given to how
individuals can reduce their personal climate footprint. But if you try to reduce your
personal climate footprint, the best-case scenario is avoiding around 5-20 tonnes of
emissions per year (roughly the average emissions of the citizens of a rich country) —
often at great expense.
Instead we should be asking, “What’s the best thing I can do to tackle climate
change?” By making well-targeted donations, through carefully targeted advocacy
efforts, or using your career to tackle climate change, we think you could do vastly
more than avoid 20 tonnes of emissions per year, and probably with less personal
sacrifice.
Rather than not doing wrong, modern ethics should be focused far more on how we
can best do good.
So how can we best do good? Despite the vital importance of this question, it’s
received very little direct study. We need a new field that applies our best methods for
seeking truth to answer it.
And it turns out that while ‘helping two people is better than one’ and ‘let’s use reason
and evidence to find the best ways to help’ sound like obvious principles, if you follow
them where they lead, you end up in some pretty weird places. It’s perhaps similar to
how using reason and evidence to search for truth led us to quantum mechanics.
This means we also need to rethink which actions actually do the most to help.

These are the insights behind the ‘effective altruism’ movement, which we helped to
found in 2012. Effective altruism is the search for the best ways to help others. It can be
divided into two projects:
● A research field aimed at finding the actions that achieve the most good.
● A community of people around the world who work together to put the ideas in
practice and have a positive impact.
To think effective altruism is worthwhile in principle, all you need to believe is that it’s
good to help others, and that you’d prefer to help more people rather than fewer.
If we combine this with the opening claim that some ways of helping are much more
effective than others, but they’re not what people are focused on today, then it implies
we need a new field of research to search for the best ways of helping, and that by
applying the findings, we can do a lot more good.
We see 80,000 Hours as a project within the broader project of effective altruism. Our
focus is on finding the career paths and strategies that enable you to best help others,
but effective altruism in general is about all ways of doing good: through donations,
career change, volunteering, consumption, campaigning, etc.
There’s now a global community of thousands of people trying to put these ideas into
practice, and tens of billions of dollars committed to the approach. Here’s how to get
involved.
Below, you can either learn more about effective altruism, or you can continue with the
key ideas series to see how we apply effective altruism to career choice.
Learn more about effective altruism
You have a choice of introductions:
● Our podcast series: Effective Altruism: an introduction
● An online article: An Introduction to Effective Altruism
● An academic article: Effective Altruism by Will MacAskill
You can also readDoing Good Better, which is by our co-founder and Oxford
philosopher, Will MacAskill. Steven Levitt, the author ofFreakonomics, said the book
“should be required reading for anyone interested in making the world better.” The
book is more focused on measurable global health interventions than we are today, but
discusses the same principles. Will MacAskill also has a more recent TED talk.

Further reading
● What is the core idea of effective altruism? an interview with our founder,
Benjamin Todd
● The guiding principles of effective altruism by the Centre for Effective Altruism
● Effective altruism by GiveWell
● Common objections to effective altruism
● Misconceptions about effective altruism
Other articles on foundations
● Expected value: how can we know what makes a difference when uncertain?
● Why good judgement is so crucial to doing good, and how to improve
● Is it ever OK to take a harmful career for the greater good?
● How to estimate very uncertain things. An introduction to practical bayesianism.
● Moral uncertainty: how to act when uncertain you’re about what’s good
● Cluelessness: can we ever know the effects of our actions?
● Counterfactuals and how they change our view of what does good

3. Global priorities: what’s the world’s most
pressing problem?
Why the problem you work on is the biggest driver
of your impact
Click to read online
If you want to make a difference, which issue is best to work on –– climate change,
education, pandemics, or something else?
People often think that making these kinds of comparisons is near impossible. The
most common advice is that you should just work on whatever issue you’re passionate
about.
But we believe some global problems are far bigger and more neglected than others,
and so which issues you work on will probably be the biggest driver of your impact.
An introduction to comparing global problems
We’d like to see a great many global problems get more attention, but as individuals,
the best we can do is identify the biggest gaps in existing efforts and help fill them.
To find these gaps, one starting point is to look for problems that are:
1. Important: if progress is made, how much social impact would result?
2. Neglected: how much effort will be invested in this problem by others?
3. Tractable: how easy is it to make progress per unit of resources?
In this article, we’ll argue that there are huge differences in how important and
neglected different issues seem, which don’t seem to be offset by differences in
tractability.
This means that by choosing a different issue, you might be able to increase how much
impact you have by over 100 times.
Some problems are bigger than others
Climate change is widely considered one of the world’s biggest problems, and we think
it’s even bigger than often supposed. While the most likely scenario is several degrees
of warming, the uncertainty in climate models means it’s hard to rule out warming over
10°C by 2200.

What’s more, the CO2 we emit today will stay in the atmosphere for tens of thousands
of years, impacting our children’s grandchildren and beyond. We think future
generations matter, which makes the issue even bigger in scale.
But we also think there may be issues that are even larger still.
The philosopher Toby Ord has argued that in 1945 humanity entered a new age, which
he calls ‘the Precipice.’ On July 16, 1945, humanity detonated the first atomic bomb,
which would eventually make it possible — for the first time in history — that a small
group of people could destroy most of the world’s cities within hours.
The annual risk of an all-out nuclear exchange is small, but it’s not zero: there is always
the chance of an accident or malfunction.
The average of several expert surveys estimated the chance of a US-Russia exchange is
0.4% per year.
The probability of an all-out exchange is lower, but over our lives and the lives of our
children, it could still add up to a substantial chance of a catastrophe potentially more
devastating than climate change.
Besides killing most people living in urban areas, the resulting fires could lift enough
ash into the air to obscure the sun and reduce global temperatures for years, leading to
widespread famine through a phenomenon known as ‘nuclear winter.’
Within months, this would not only kill most people alive today, but it could also lead
to a collapse of civilisation itself. We think a permanent collapse is very unlikely, but
when we consider the scale of the consequences — the loss of all future generations —
that risk may be the worst thing about a nuclear conflict.
But the possibility of extreme climate change and nuclear winter are just two examples
of a broader trend.
Technology has given this generation unprecedented power to shape history. The
consequences of the decisions we make today about nuclear weapons, genetic
engineering, artificial intelligence, space settlement, and other emerging technologies
could ripple forward for thousands of years, with either enormously positive or
enormously negative consequences.
So: some problems aremuch biggerthan others.
Some problems are more neglected than others
In 2016 we argued that a global pandemic posed a significant global risk, but with
around $10 billion spent globally on preventing the worst pandemics per year,1 it was

more neglected than climate change or international development (which receive
hundreds of billions) — which are in turn far more neglected than education and health
in rich countries (which receive trillions).
Why work on issues that are comparatively neglected? At least among issues that are
roughly similar in importance, it’s usually harder to have a big impact working on more
established or popular issues, because there are probably already people working on
the most promising interventions. For this reason, if you’re the 100th person working
on a problem, your contribution is likely to make a much larger difference than if you’re
the 10,000th.
How much larger? In our view, returns to more work diminish relatively quickly, and
approximately ‘logarithmically’ — meaning that it matters a lot how neglected an area
is.
From what we’ve seen, some global issues appear to bethousands of times more
neglectedthan others of similar importance — they receive only a tiny fraction of the
resources. This implies that if all else is held constant, work in some areas isthousands
of times more effectivethan work in others.
Inspired by this argument, one of our readers, Cassidy, realised that her knowledge as
a doctor might be put to even better use in pandemic prevention.

She applied to a masters in public health programme, and from there was able to get
into a biosecurity PhD at Oxford. Since the field of pandemic control was relatively
small before COVID-19, she was able to advance quickly. When COVID-19 broke out,
she was ready to advise the UK government on policy ideas to control COVID-19, as
well as how to prevent the next (potentially much worse) outbreak.
Cassidy realised she could help more people by working on
pandemic policy than by seeing one patient at a time as a
doctor.
The importance of working on neglected issues means that following your current
passions could easily point you in the wrong direction. You’re most likely to stumble
across the same issues everyone is already talking about, which will usually be among
theleastneglected. The best options are probably unconventional.
Which issues might be even more neglected than pandemics?
A survey of AI researchers in 2017 found that they believe there’s about a 50% chance
that AI systems will exceed human capacities in most jobs around 2060. This would be
one of the most important events in history.
These same researchers also estimated that if this happened, while the outcome might
be ‘extremely good,’ there is also a 5% chance the outcome could be ‘extremely bad’
(e.g. human extinction). And as the people developing the technology, they’re
probably on the optimistic side.
One reason some people are concerned is that it’s unclear whether AI systems will
continue to stay aligned with human values as they become more powerful. This could
suggest that research into ‘AI alignment’ is a crucial challenge from a long-term
perspective.
Since we first wrote about it in 2012, AI alignment has grown into a flourishing field of
research in computer science, but it still receives under $100 million in funding per year
— about 100 times less than preventing pandemics.
Long-term AIpolicy— addressing the question of how society and government should
handle advancing AI — is even more neglected. (Read more about our case for both.)

How much do problems differ overall?
How important and neglected a problem is multiply together to determine how
pressing the issue is overall.
We’ve argued that some issues seem over 100 times bigger than others, and some
seem over 100 times more neglected than others.
Since it’s often the most important issues that seem the most neglected, this would
suggest that overall you’ll have over 10,000 times as much impact working on some
issues rather than others (all else equal).
However, there are some strong counterarguments to acting as if the spread is this
large, which we discuss in our podcast about the key ideas series. Overall, we think the
differences are more like 1,000-fold.
For instance, based on our view of global priorities, we think by focusing on global
poverty rather than a typical social issue in a rich country, you might have 10–100 times
as much impact, and then by focusing on existential risk, you might have 10–100 times
as much impact again.
You might differ from us in which issues you think are most pressing, but we expect
you’ll still conclude there are very large differences.
What does this spread imply?
In an ideal world, there would be far more people working on every important social
issue. But each of us only has one career, and we’ll all have far more impact if we focus
on the issues that are the most pressing for us to work on.
If it’s possible to have 100 or even 1,000 times as much impact per year by changing
the issue we focus on, that’s a huge deal. It would probably be the single biggest thing
you could do to increase the impact of your career.
If you don’t have the option of making a big career change right now, there’s a lot you
can do to support the most pressing issues no matter your current job, through
donations, political engagement and mobilising others. But how about working on
these issues directly?
Sometimes it’s relatively easy to support a new issue in your existing role. For instance,
if you work in media, you might be able to tilt which issues you cover.
Our readers are sometimes surprised at how their existing skills can be applied to
unusual problems like AI alignment.

Brian Tse was working at an investment bank in Hong Kong and didn’t have a
background in AI. But he started to learn more about it in his spare time, and using his
bilingual background, began translating materials to connect Western and Chinese
researchers.
He now runs an independent consulting firm advising organisations in China, the
United States, and Europe on the safety and governance of AI and other potentially
transformative technologies — a path he also finds much more fulfilling and exciting
than banking.
While working in the corporate world, Brian learned about AI
and other transformative technologies. He now consults with
many key Chinese and Western organisations that work on
AI, with the aim of helping them coordinate better.
Many people working in government have significant flexibility about which areas of
policy they work on. For instance, Clíodhna was working in health policy, but after
learning more about AI alignment, she was able to switch to working at the intersection
of AI and health.
But even if the switch seems hard, the huge potential gains could mean it’s easily worth
it — even if you’d need to retrain, take a more junior role, or test out a role where
you’re not sure you’d be a good fit or aren’t sure how to make progress on the issue.
People we advise are often tempted to go for an issue they think is second-tier
because it seems easier to enter. But if a top-tier issue might have 10 times the impact,
it’s often worth spending some time testing out your fit, even if you’re not sure it’ll work
out.
That’s not to downplay the difficulty — orienting your career around a new problem is a
big decision. Our main message is that it deserves some very, very serious thought —
and much more attention than it normally gets.
Choosing a problem and your career: some common
misunderstandings
We discuss how choosing a problem fits into the rest of your career plan and strategy
in more depth in our planning process, but here are a couple of quick clarifications.

Do I need to pick an issue right away?
No. The importance of choosing a problem means it’s worth giving yourself time to
reflect on your worldview and learn about different issues. People’s views on these
questions often develop over the course of several years, and that’s time well spent.
Early in your career (say under 30), it’s often more important to invest in career capital
that can give you more leverage to work on whichever issues turn out to be most
pressing in the future, when you’re at your peak productivity. In the meantime, it’s
usually enough just to have a broad sense of the types of issues you want to work on,
and can narrow down later.
One important exception is if you’re considering making a big commitment to a
particular issue, such as a specialised PhD, or a particular career track, such as
medicine. In this case, we’d encourage you to think more about your choice of issue
right away.
And if you’re lucky enough to have already found a promising way to tackle a big
problem early on, by all means get started right away.
If you’re later in your career, then the most important decisions you face are probably
which issues to focus on, and how to use your existing career capital to contribute to
them.
Are you saying everyone should work on the top issue?
No. People often think we think everyone should work on AI, but this isn’t the case.
We think the impact you have over your career depends on:
1. How pressing the problems you focus on are
2. How effective the solutions you pursue are
3. The amount of leverage you can apply to those solutions
4. Your personal fit for the path
Although we think the first factor is often the most important, the other three factors
also matter a great deal. So, even if you agree with us about which problems are most
pressing, it doesn’t mean you should only work on the top one.
For instance, we once advised someone who was choosing between a senior position
in international development policy, or starting at the bottom in emerging technology
policy. It seemed like they would have about 100 times as much leverage in the senior
position, and it was also a better personal fit, so we recommended international
development over AI.

As another example, we often encourage people with biology backgrounds to work on
pandemics over AI due to their better fit.
Coordination and why to spread out over issues
Considering coordination gives us yet more reasons to spread out over a range of
problems.
Ultimately, our readers help form a community of thousands of people trying to tackle
global problems, which broadly overlaps with the effective altruism community. This
community should work on a ‘portfolio’ of issues for several reasons:
1. Diminishing returns: there are often a couple of especially good but
time-sensitive opportunities within each issue each year. It’s important to have at
least some people working on each issue so they’re able to take these.
2. Information value: by working on an issue, you learn more about how effective it
is. While we think most people should work on the top issues, a minority should
spread out over a wide range of plausible priorities in case they discover one is
better than our current list.
3. Building capacity: for similar reasons, it’s useful to have experts in a wide range
of issues to help prioritise further effort, and so we can act more quickly if
priorities change.
4. Getting more people involved: by working in one area, you might meet people
who want to get involved in other areas. This has happened a lot in effective
altruism in the past.
The overall picture is that perhaps 50% should focus on the top issues, 30% on
secondary issues, and 20% should be spread across perhaps 30+ other promising or
important areas.
Here is some data on how our community is currently allocated, and what allocation we
think might be ideal. We also have an article that discusses community coordination in
detail.
If you see yourself as part of a community aiming to tackle social issues, whether the
effective altruism or more broadly, then in order to choose a problem, ask yourself:
1. How would the community’s efforts ideally be allocated over issues?
2. Where are the gaps, and how can I best move the allocation towards the ideal?
3. Where is my comparative advantage compared to other community members?
Likewise, the community as a whole can ask itself the same question: how would the
world’s efforts ideally be allocated, and how can we best move it towards that ideal?

So which issues do we think are most pressing?
Given the importance of this question, we dedicate a couple of articles to it in the key
ideas series.
First, we introduce the case for working to reduce existential risk, and why now might
be the most important century. Then we give our ranked list of issues.
We’ve also supported the development of the field of global priorities research, which
tries to break down and answer the questions involved. For example, how should we
allocate resources between reducing the risk of a disaster on the one hand, and
preventing a more certain harm on the other? There’s now an institute dedicated to this
topic at Oxford.
Despite the vital importance of this research, there are still only dozens of researchers
directly focused on it.
Ben Garfinkel was considering a physics PhD, but thought that since so many extremely
smart people already do physics research, it would be hard to make a big contribution.
He learned about global priorities research through a talk we gave, and after testing it
out through a temporary position, decided to switch fields. He then developed
important criticisms of arguments for prioritising AI.
This kind of criticism is exactly what we want to see more of. There’s a good chance our
views of which problems are most pressing are incomplete or mistaken in some ways.
We want people to make the case for alternatives, and find issues we haven’t even
thought of yet.
Further reading on how to compare problems
First, you can learn more about the important, neglected, tractable framework:
● Here’s a popular introduction.
● Here’s a more technical discussion of a quantitative version of the framework.
As part of our career planning process, we have an article that guides you through a
more comprehensive process for comparing problems.
Here is some more in-depth reading:
● Doing good together: coordinating as a community
● Ben Todd and Robert Wiblin discuss how much problems differ in effectiveness
in our podcast on the key ideas series
● Crucial considerations and wise philanthropy by Nick Bostrom
● The moral value of information by Amanda Askell

The case for reducing existential risks
Click to read online
In 1939, Einstein wrote to Roosevelt:
It may be possible to set up a nuclear chain reaction in a large mass of
uranium…and it is conceivable — though much less certain — that extremely
powerful bombs of a new type may thus be constructed.
Just a few years later, these bombs were created. In little more than a decade, enough
had been produced that, for the first time in history, a handful of decision-makers could
destroy civilisation.
Humanity had entered a new age, in which we faced not only existential risks18 from our
natural environment, but also the possibility that we might be able to extinguish
ourselves.
Prefer a podcast?
Since publishing this article, we recorded two podcast episodes with Dr Toby
Ord, an Oxford philosopher and trustee of 80,000 Hours, about existential risk.
We think they are at least as good introductions as this article — maybe better.
Listen to them here:
● Toby Ord on the precipice and humanity’s potential futures
● Why the long-term future of humanity matters more than anything else,
and what we should do about it
Prefer a book?
Dr Toby Ord has recently publishedThe Precipice:Existential Risk and the
Future of Humanitywhich gives an overview of the existential risks facing
humanity today, and what we can do to reduce them.
Sign up for our newsletter and we’ll send you a free copy!
18Nick Bostromdefines an existential riskas an eventthat “could cause human extinction or
permanently and drastically curtail humanity’s potential.” An existential risk is distinct from aglobal
catastrophic risk (GCR)in its scope – a GCR is catastrophicat a global scale, but retains the possibility for
recovery. An existential threatseems to be usedasa linguistic modifier of a threat to make it appear
more dire.

In this new age, what should be our biggest priority as a civilisation? Improving
technology? Helping the poor? Changing the political system?
Here’s a suggestion that’s not so often discussed: our first priority should be tosurvive.
So long as civilisation continues to exist, we’ll have the chance to solve all our other
problems, and have a far better future. But if we go extinct, that’s it.
Why isn’t this priority more discussed? Here’s one reason: many people don’t yet
appreciate the change in situation, and so don’t think our future is at risk.
Social science researcher Spencer Greenberg surveyed Americans on their estimate of
the chances of human extinction within 50 years. The results found that many think the
chances are extremely low, with over 30% guessing they’re under 1 in 10 million.19
We used to think the risks were extremely low as well, but when we looked into it, we
changed our minds. As we’ll see, researchers who study these issues think the risks are
over one thousand times higher, and are probably increasing.
These concerns have started a new movement working to safeguard civilisation, which
has been joined by Stephen Hawking, Max Tegmark, and new institutes founded by
researchers at Cambridge, MIT, Oxford, and elsewhere.
In the rest of this article, we cover the greatest risks to civilisation, including some that
might be bigger than nuclear war and climate change. We then make the case that
reducing these risks could be the most important thing you do with your life, and
explain exactly what you can do to help. If you would like to use your career to work on
these issues, we can also give one-on-one support.
How likely are you to be killed by an asteroid? An overview of
naturally occurring existential risks
A 1-in-10-million chance of extinction in the next 50 years — what many people think
the risk is — must be an underestimate. Naturally occurring existential risks can be
estimated pretty accurately from history, and are much higher.
If Earth was hit by a kilometre-wide asteroid, there’s a chance that civilisation would be
destroyed. By looking at the historical record, and tracking the objects in the sky,
astronomers can estimate the risk of an asteroid this size hitting Earth as about 1 in
5,000 per century. That’s higher than most people’s chances of being in a plane crash
19See footnote 3here.

(about 1 in 5 million per flight), and already about 1,000 times higher than the
1-in-10-million risk that some people estimated.20
Some argue that although a kilometre-sized object would be a disaster, it wouldn’t be
enough to cause extinction, so this is a high estimate of the risk. But on the other hand,
there are other naturally occurring risks, such as supervolcanoes.21
All this said, natural risks are still quite small in absolute terms. An upcoming paper by
Dr Toby Ord estimated that if we sum all the natural risks together, they’re very unlikely
to add up to more than a 1 in 300 chance of extinction per century.22
Unfortunately, as we’ll now show, the natural risks are dwarfed by the human-caused
ones. And this is why the risk of extinction has become an especially urgent issue.
A history of progress, leading to the start of the most dangerous
epoch in human history
If you look at history over millennia, the basic message is that for a long time almost
everyone was poor, and then in the 18th century, that changed.23
20The odds of crashing into the Atlantic on a Virgin operated A330 flying from Heathrow to JFK (1 in 5.4
million). So, you’d need to fly 1000 times in your life to be equally likely to be in a plane crash as in an
asteroid disaster. “A crash course in probability,”The Economist, 2015.Web link.
21A sufficiently large supervolcano could also cause a long winter that ends life. Some other natural risks
could include an especially deadly pandemic, a nearby supernova or gamma-ray burst, or naturally
caused runaway climate change.
22You can see a summary of the contents of the paper in “Dr Toby Ord – Will We Cause Our Own
Extinction? Natural versus Anthropogenic Extinction Risks”, a lecture given at CSER in Cambridge in
2015.Link.
23Graph produced from Maddison, Angus (2007):Contoursof the World Economy, 1–2030 AD. Essays in
Macro-Economic History, Oxford University Press, ISBN978-0-19-922721-1, p. 379, table A.4.

This was caused by the Industrial Revolution — perhaps the most important event in
history.
It wasn’t just wealth that grew. The following chart shows that over the long term, life
expectancy, energy use and democracy have all grown rapidly, while the percentage
living in poverty has dramatically decreased.

Literacy and education levels have also dramatically increased:
Image source
People also seem to become happier as they get wealthier.
InThe Better Angels of Our Nature, Steven Pinker argues that violence is going down.
Individual freedom has increased, while racism, sexism, and homophobia have
decreased.
Many people think the world is getting worse,24 and it’s true that modern civilisation
does some terrible things, such as factory farming. But as you can see in the data,
many important measures of progress have improved dramatically.
24Different surveys find substantially different results for how pessimistic people are about the future, but
many find that a majority think the world is getting worse. For instance, a recent government survey in
the UK found that 71% of respondents said they thought the world was getting worse. Pete Etchells,
“Declinism: is the world actually getting worse?”,The Guardian, 2015,Archived link, retrieved
17-October-2017.

More to the point, no matter what you think has happened in the past, if we look
forward, improving technology, political organisation and freedom gives our
descendants the potential to solve our current problems, and have vastly better lives.25
It is possible to end poverty, prevent climate change, alleviate suffering, and more.
But also notice the purple line on the second chart:war-making capacity. It’s based on
estimates of global military power by the historian Ian Morris, and it has also increased
dramatically.
Here’s the issue: improving technology holds the possibility of enormous gains, but
also enormous risks.
Each time we discover a new technology, most of the time it yields huge benefits. But
there’s also a chance we discover a technology with more destructive power than we
have the ability to wisely use.
And so, although the present generation lives in the most prosperous period in human
history, it’s plausibly also the most dangerous.
The first destructive technology of this kind was nuclear weapons.
Nuclear weapons: a history of near misses
Today we all have North Korea’s nuclear programme on our minds, but current events
are just one chapter in a long saga of near misses.
We came close to nuclear war several times during the Cuban Missile Crisis alone. In
one incident, the Americans resolved that if one of their spy planes were shot down,
they would immediately invade Cuba without a further War Council meeting. The next
day, a spy plane was shot down. JFK called the council anyway, and decided against
invading.
An invasion of Cuba might well have triggered nuclear war; it later emerged that Castro
was in favour of nuclear retaliation even if “it would’ve led to the complete annihilation
of Cuba.” Some of the launch commanders in Cuba also had independent authority to
target American forces with tactical nuclear weapons in the event of an invasion.
In another incident, a Russian nuclear submarine was trying to smuggle materials into
Cuba when they were discovered by the American fleet. The fleet began to drop
dummy depth charges to force the submarine to surface. The Russian captain thought
they were real depth charges and that, while out of radio communication, the third
world war had started. He ordered a nuclear strike on the American fleet with one of
their nuclear torpedoes.
25See footnote 12here.

Fortunately, he needed the approval of other senior officers. One, Vasili Arkhipov,
disagreed, preventing war.
Thank you Vasili Arkhipov.
Putting all these events together, JFK later estimated that the chances of nuclear war
were “between one in three and even.”
There have been plenty of other close calls with Russia, even after the Cold War, as
listed on this nice Wikipedia page. And those are just the ones we know about.
Nuclear experts today are just as concerned about tensions between India and
Pakistan, which both possess nuclear weapons, as North Korea.26
The key problem is that several countries maintain large nuclear arsenals that are ready
to be deployed in minutes. This means that a false alarm or accident can rapidly
escalate into a full-blown nuclear war, especially in times of tense foreign relations.
Would a nuclear war end civilisation? It was initially thought that a nuclear blast might
be so hot that it would ignite the atmosphere and make the Earth uninhabitable.
Scientists estimated this was sufficiently unlikely that the weapons could be “safely”
tested, and we now know this won’t happen.
In the 1980s, the concern was that ash from burning buildings would plunge the Earth
into a long-term winter that would make it impossible to grow crops for decades.
26For the chance of a bomb hitting a civilian target, see the figure one third down the page “What is the
probability that a nuclear bomb will be dropped on a civilian target in the next decade?” Note that one
expert estimated the chance of a nuclear strike on a civilian target in the next decade at less than 1%.
We’re Edging Closer To Nuclear War, Milo Beckman,FiveThirtyEight, 2017,
Archived link, retrieved 17-October-2017

Modern climate models suggest that a nuclear winter severe enough to kill everyone is
very unlikely, though it’s hard to be confident due to model uncertainty.27
Even a “mild” nuclear winter, however, could still cause mass starvation.28 For this and
other reasons, a nuclear war would be extremely destabilising, and it’s unclear whether
civilisation could recover.
How likely is a nuclear war to permanently end civilisation? It’s very hard to estimate,
but it seems hard to conclude that the chance of a civilisation-ending nuclear war in the
next century isn’t over 0.3%. That would mean the risks from nuclear weapons are
greater than all the natural risks put together. (Read more about nuclear risks.)
This is why the 1950s marked the start of a new age for humanity. For the first time in
history, it became possible for a small number of decision-makers to wreak havoc on
the whole world. We now pose the greatest threat to our own survival — that makes
today the most dangerous point in human history.
And nuclear weapons aren’t the only way we could end civilisation.
How big is the risk of runaway climate change?
In 2015, President Obama said in his State of the Union address that “No challenge
poses a greater threat to future generations than climate change.”
Climate change is certainly a major risk to civilisation.
The graph below shows estimates of climate sensitivity. Climate sensitivity is how much
warming to expect in the long term if CO2 concentrations double, which is roughly
what’s expected within the century.
27Climate models involve significant uncertainty, which means the risks could easily be higher than
current models suggest. Moreover, the existence of model uncertainty in general makes it hard to give
very low estimates of most risks, as is explained in: Ord, T., Hillerbrand, R., & Sandberg, A. (2010).
“Probing the improbable: methodological challenges for risks with low probabilities and high stakes.”
Journal of Risk Research, 13(2), pp. 191-205. arXiv:0810.5515v1,Link.
28The expected severity of nuclear winter is still being debated, and Open Philanthropyrecently funded
further investigation of the topic.

Image source
The most likely outcome is 2–4 degrees of warming, which would be bad, but
survivable.
However, these estimates give a 10% chance of warming over 6 degrees, and perhaps
a 1% chance of warming of 9 degrees. That would render large fractions of the Earth
functionally uninhabitable, requiring at least a massive reorganisation of society. It
would also probably increase conflict, and make us more vulnerable to other risks.
(If you’re sceptical of climate models, then you shouldincreaseyour uncertainty, which
makes the situationmoreworrying.)
So, it seems like the chance of a massive climate disaster created by CO2 is perhaps
similar to the chance of a nuclear war.
Researchers who study these issues think nuclear war seems more likely to result in
outright extinction, due to the possibility of nuclear winter, which is why we think
nuclear weapons pose an even greater risk than climate change. That said, climate
change is certainly a major problem, which should raise our estimate of the risks even
higher. (Read more about runaway climate change.)

What new technologies might be as dangerous as nuclear
weapons?
The invention of nuclear weapons led to the anti-nuclear movement just a decade later
in the 1960s, and the environmentalist movement soon adopted the cause of fighting
climate change.
What’s less appreciated is that new technologies will present further catastrophic risks.
This is why we need a movement that is concerned with safeguarding civilisation in
general.
Predicting the future of technology is difficult, but because we only have one
civilisation, we need to try our best. Here are some candidates for the next technology
that’s as dangerous as nuclear weapons.
In 1918–1919, over 3% of the world’s population died of the Spanish Flu.29 If such a
pandemic arose today, it might be even harder to contain due to rapid global
transport.
What’s more concerning, though, is that it may soon be possible to genetically
engineer a virus that’s as contagious as the Spanish Flu, but also deadlier, and which
could spread for years undetected.
That would be a weapon with the destructive power of nuclear weapons, but far harder
to prevent from being used. Nuclear weapons require huge factories and rare materials
to make, which makes them relatively easy to control. Designer viruses might be
possible to create in a lab with a couple of biology PhDs. In fact, in 2006,The Guardian
was able to receive segments of the extinct smallpox virus by mail order. Some terrorist
groups have expressed interest in using indiscriminate weapons like these. (Read more
about pandemic risks.)
Who ordered the smallpox? (Credit:The Guardian)
29See footnote 20here.

Another new technology with huge potential power is artificial intelligence.
The reason that humans are in charge and not chimps is purely a matter of intelligence.
Our large and powerful brains give us incredible control of the world, despite the fact
that we are so much physically weaker than chimpanzees.
So then what would happen if one day we created something much more intelligent
than ourselves?
In 2017, 350 researchers who have published peer-reviewed research into artificial
intelligence at top conferences were polled about when they believe that we will
develop computers with human-level intelligence: that is, a machine that is capable of
carrying out all work tasks better than humans.
The median estimate was that there is a 50% chance we will develop high-level
machine intelligence in 45 years, and 75% by the end of the century.
These probabilities are hard to estimate, and the researchers gave very different figures
depending on precisely how you ask the question.30 Nevertheless, it seems there is at
least a reasonable chance that some kind of transformative machine intelligence is
invented in the next century. Moreover, greater uncertainty means that it might come
sooner than people think rather than later.
30For a discussion of the inconsistencies in the estimates, see the blog post released by AI Impacts,
“Some Survey Results,”Archived link, retrieved 30-Oct-2017.

What risks might this development pose? The original pioneers in computing, like Alan
Turing and Marvin Minsky, raised concerns about the risks of powerful computer
systems,31 and these risks are still around today. We’re not talking about computers
“turning evil.” Rather, one concern is that a powerful AI system could be used by one
group to gain control of the world, or otherwise be mis-used. If the USSR had
developed nuclear weapons 10 years before the USA, the USSR might have become
the dominant global power. Powerful computer technology might pose similar risks.
Another concern is that deploying the system could have unintended consequences,
since it would be difficult to predict what something smarter than us would do. A
sufficiently powerful system might also be difficult to control, and so be hard to reverse
once implemented. These concerns have been documented by Oxford Professor Nick
Bostrom inSuperintelligenceand by AI pioneer Stuart Russell.
Most experts think that better AI will be a hugely positive development, but they also
agree there are risks. In the survey we just mentioned, AI experts estimated that the
development of high-level machine intelligence has a 10% chance of a “bad outcome”
and a 5% chance of an “extremely bad” outcome, such as human extinction. And we
should probably expect this group to be positively biased, since, after all, they make
their living from the technology.
Putting the estimates together, if there’s a 75% chance that high-level machine
intelligence is developed in the next century, then this means that the chance of a
major AI disaster is 5% of 75%, which is about 4%. (Read more about risks from artificial
intelligence.)
People have raised concern about other new technologies, such as other forms of
geo-engineering and atomic manufacturing, but they seem significantly less imminent,
so are widely seen as less dangerous than the other technologies we’ve covered. You
can see a longer list of existential risks here.
What’s probably more concerning is the risks we haven’t thought of yet. If you had
asked people in 1900 what the greatest risks to civilisation were, they probably
wouldn’t have suggested nuclear weapons, genetic engineering or artificial
intelligence, since none of these were yet invented. It’s possible we’re in the same
situation looking forward to the next century. Future “unknown unknowns” might pose
a greater risk than the risks we know today.
Each time we discover a new technology, it’s a little like betting against a single
number on a roulette wheel. Most of the time we win, and the technology is overall
31See footnotes 15-18 inExistential risk from artificialintelligence, Wikipedia,archived link, retrieved
21-Oct-2018.

good. But each time there’s also a small chance the technology gives us more
destructive power than we can handle, and we lose everything.
Each new technology we develop has both unprecedented potential and perils.Image source.
What’s the total risk of human extinction if we add everything
together?
Many experts who study these issues estimate that the total chance of human
extinction in the next century is between 1 and 20%.
For instance, an informal poll in 2008 at a conference on catastrophic risks found they
believe it’s pretty likely we’ll face a catastrophe that kills over a billion people, and
estimate a 19% chance of extinction before 2100.

Risk At least 1 billion Human
dead extinction
Number killed by molecular nanotech 10% 5%
weapons.
Total killed by superintelligent AI. 5% 5%
Total killed in all wars (including civil wars). 30% 4%
Number killed in the single biggest 10% 2%
engineered pandemic.
Total killed in all nuclear wars. 10% 1%
Number killed in the single biggest 1% 0.5%
nanotech accident.
Number killed in the single biggest natural 5% 0.05%
pandemic.
Total killed in all acts of nuclear terrorism. 1% 0.03%
Overall risk of extinction prior to 2100 n/a 19%
These figures are about one million times higher than what people normally think.
In our podcast episode with Will MacAskill, we discuss why he puts the risk of
extinction this century at around 1%.
In his bookThe Precipice: Existential Risk and theFuture of Humanity, Dr Toby Ord
gives his guess at our total existential risk this century as 1 in 6 — a roll of the dice.
(Listen to our episode with Toby.)
What should we make of these estimates? Presumably, the researchers only work on
these issues because they think they’re so important, so we should expect their

estimates to be high (due to selection bias). But does that mean we can dismiss their
concerns entirely?
Given this, what’s our personal best guess? It’s very hard to say, but we find it hard to
confidently ignore the risks. Overall, we guess the risk is likely over 3%.
Why helping to safeguard the future could be the most important
thing you can do with your life
How much should we prioritise working to reduce these risks compared to other issues,
like global poverty, ending cancer or political change?
At 80,000 Hours, we do research to help people find careers with positive social
impact. As part of this, we try to find the most urgent problems in the world to work on.
We evaluate different global problems using our problem framework, which compares
problems in terms of:
● Scale — how many are affected by the problem
● Neglectedness — how many people are working on it already
● Solvability — how easy it is to make progress
If you apply this framework, we think that safeguarding the future comes out as the
world’s biggest priority. And so, if you want to have a big positive impact with your
career, this is the top area to focus on.
In the next few sections, we’ll evaluate this issue on scale, neglectedness and
solvability, drawing heavily onExistential Risk Preventionas a Global Priorityby Nick
Bostrom and unpublished work by Toby Ord, as well as our own research.
First, let’s start with the scale of the issue. We’ve argued there’s likely over a 3% chance
of extinction in the next century. How big an issue is this?
One figure we can look at is how many people might die in such a catastrophe. The
population of the Earth in the middle of the century will be about 10 billion, so a 3%
chance of everyone dying means the expected number of deaths is about 300 million.
This is probably more deaths than we can expect over the next century due to the
diseases of poverty, like malaria.32
Many of the risks we’ve covered could also cause a “medium” catastrophe rather than
one that ends civilisation, and this is presumably significantly more likely. The survey
32There are millions of deaths each year due to easily preventable diseases, such as malaria and
diarrhoea, though the numbers are falling rapidly, so it seems unlikely they will exceed 300 million in the
next century: Annual malaria deaths cut from 3.8 million to about 0.7 million, Annual diarrhoeal deaths
(cut) from 4.6 million to 1.6 million.Aid Works (OnAverage), Dr Toby Ord, Giving What We Can,Web.

we covered earlier suggested over a 10% chance of a catastrophe that kills over 1
billion people in the next century, which would be at least another 100 million deaths
in expectation, along with far more suffering among those who survive.
So, even if we only focus on the impact on the present generation, these catastrophic
risks are one of the most serious issues facing humanity.
But this is a huge underestimate of the scale of the problem, because if civilisation
ends, then we give up our entire future too.
Most people want to leave a better world for their grandchildren, and most also think
we should have some concern for future generations more broadly. There could be
many more people having great lives in the future than there are people alive today,
and we should have some concern for their interests. There’s a possibility that human
civilization could last for millions of years, so when we consider the impact of the risks
on future generations, the stakes are millions of times higher — for good or evil. As
Carl Sagan wrote on the costs of nuclear war inForeignAffairs:
A nuclear war imperils all of our descendants, for as long as there will be
humans. Even if the population remains static, with an average lifetime of the
order of 100 years, over a typical time period for the biological evolution of a
successful species (roughly ten million years), we are talking about some 500
trillion people yet to come. By this criterion, the stakes are one million times
greater for extinction than for the more modest nuclear wars that kill “only”
hundreds of millions of people. There are many other possible measures of the
potential loss–including culture and science, the evolutionary history of the
planet, and the significance of the lives of all of our ancestors who contributed
to the future of their descendants. Extinction is the undoing of the human
enterprise.
We’re glad the Romans didn’t let humanity go extinct, since it means that all of modern
civilisation has been able to exist. We think we owe a similar responsibility to the
people who will come after us, assuming (as we believe) that they are likely to lead
fulfilling lives. It would be reckless and unjust to endanger their existence just to make
ourselves better off in the short-term.
It’s not just that there might be more people in the future. As Sagan also pointed out,
no matter what you think is of value, there is potentially a lot more of it in the future.
Future civilisation could create a world without need or want, and make mind-blowing
intellectual and artistic achievements. We could build a far more just and virtuous
society. And there’s no in-principle reason why civilisation couldn’t reach other planets,
of which there are some 100 billion in our galaxy. If we let civilisation end, then none of
this can ever happen.

We’re unsure whether this great future will really happen, but that’s all the more reason
to keep civilisation going so we have a chance to find out. Failing to pass on the torch
to the next generation might be the worst thing we could ever do.
So, a couple of percent risk that civilisation ends seems likely to be the biggest issue
facing the world today. What’s also striking is just how neglected these risks are.
Why these risks are some of the most neglected global issues
Here is how much money per year goes into some important causes:33
Cause Annual targeted spending from all sources (highly
approximate)
Global R&D $1.5 trillion
Luxury goods $1.3 trillion
US social welfare $900 billion
Climate change >$300 billion
To the global poor >$250 billion
Nuclear security $1-10 billion
Extreme pandemic $1 billion
prevention
AI safety research $10 million
As you can see, we spend a vast amount of resources on R&D to develop even more
powerful technology. We also expend a lot in a (possibly misguided) attempt to
improve our lives by buying luxury goods.
33See footnote 28here.

Far less is spent mitigating catastrophic risks from climate change. Welfare spending in
the US alone dwarfsglobalspending on climate change.
But climate change still receives enormous amounts of money compared to some of
these other risks we’ve covered. We roughly estimate that the prevention of extreme
global pandemics receives under 300 times less, even though the size of the risk seems
about the same.
Research to avoid accidents from AI systems is the most neglected of all, perhaps
receiving 100 times fewer resources again, at around only $10 million per year.
You’d find a similar picture if you looked at thenumber of peopleworking on these
risks rather than money spent, but it’s easier to get figures for money.
If we look at scientific attention instead, we see a similar picture of neglect (though,
some of the individual risks receive significant attention, such as climate change):
Credit:Nick Bostrom
Our impression is that if you look at political attention, you’d find a similar picture to
the funding figures. An overwhelming amount of political attention goes on concrete
issues that help the present generation in the short-term, since that’s what gets votes.
Catastrophic risks are far more neglected. Then, among the catastrophic risks, climate
change gets the most attention, while issues like pandemics and AI are the most
neglected.

This neglect in resources, scientific study and political attention is exactly what you’d
expect to happen from the underlying economics, and are why the area presents an
opportunity for people who want to make the world a better place.
First, these risks aren’t the responsibility of any single nation. Suppose the US invested
heavily to prevent climate change. This benefits everyone in the world, but only about
5% of the world’s population lives in the US, so US citizens would only receive 5% of
the benefits of this spending. This means the US will dramatically underinvest in these
efforts compared to how much they’re worth to the world. And the same is true of
every other country.
This could be solved if we could allcoordinate— if every nation agreed to contribute
its fair share to reducing climate change, then all nations would benefit by avoiding its
worst effects.
Unfortunately, from the perspective of each individual nation, it’s better ifevery other
country reduces their emissions, while leaving their own economy unhampered. So,
there’s an incentive for each nation to defect from climate agreements, and this is why
so little progress gets made (it’s a prisoner’s dilemma).
And in fact, this dramatically understates the problem. The greatest beneficiaries of
efforts to reduce catastrophic risks arefuturegenerations. They have no way to stand
up for their interests, whether economically or politically.
If future generations could vote in our elections, then they’d vote overwhelmingly in
favour of safer policies. Likewise, if future generations could send money back in time,
they’d be willing to pay us huge amounts of money to reduce these risks. (Technically,
reducing these risks creates a trans-generational, global public good, which should
make them among the most neglected ways to do good.)
Our current system does a poor job of protecting future generations. We know people
who have spoken to top government officials in the UK, and many want to do
something about these risks, but they say the pressures of the news and election cycle
make it hard to focus on them. In most countries, there is no government agency that
naturally has mitigation of these risks in its remit.
This is a depressing situation, but it’s also an opportunity. For people whodowant to
make the world a better place, this lack of attention means there are lots high-impact
ways to help.
What can be done about these risks?
We’ve covered the scale and neglectedness of these issues, but what about the third
element of our framework, solvability?

It’s less certain that we can make progress on these issues than more conventional
areas like global health. It’s much easier to measure our impact on health (at least in the
short-run) and we have decades of evidence on what works. This means working to
reduce catastrophic risks looks worse on solvability.
However, there is still much we can do, and given the huge scale and neglectedness of
these risks, they still seem like the most urgent issues.
We’ll sketch out some ways to reduce these risks, divided into three broad categories:
1. Targeted efforts to reduce specific risks
One approach is to address each risk directly. There are many concrete proposals for
dealing with each, such as the following:
1. Many experts agree that better disease surveillance would reduce the risk of
pandemics. This could involve improved technology or better collection and
aggregation of existing data, to help us spot new pandemics faster. And the
faster you can spot a new pandemic, the easier it is to manage.
2. There are many ways to reduce climate change, such as helping to develop
better solar panels, or introducing a carbon tax.
3. With AI, we can do research into the “control problem” within computer
science, to reduce the chance of unintended damage from powerful AI systems.
A recent paper,Concrete problems in AI safety, outlines some specific topics,
but only about 20 people work full-time on similar research today.
4. In nuclear security, many experts think that the deterrence benefits of nuclear
weapons could be maintained with far smaller stockpiles. But, lower stockpiles
would also reduce the risks of accidents, as well as the chance that a nuclear war,
if it occurred, would end civilisation.
We go into more depth on what you can do to tackle each risk within our problem
profiles:
1. AI safety
2. Pandemic prevention
3. Nuclear security
4. Runaway climate change
We don’t focus on naturally caused risks in this section, because they’re much less likely
and we’re already doing a lot to deal with some of them. Improved wealth and
technology makes us more resilient to natural risks, and a huge amount of effort
already goes into getting more of these.

2. Broad efforts to reduce risks
Rather than try to reduce each risk individually, we can try to make civilisation generally
better at managing them. The “broad” efforts help to reduce all the threats at once,
even those we haven’t thought of yet.
For instance, there are key decision-makers, often in government, who will need to
manage these risks as they arise. If we could improve the decision-making ability of
these people and institutions, then it would help to make society in general more
resilient, and solve many other problems.
Recent research has uncovered lots of ways to improve decision-making, but most of it
hasn’t yet been implemented. At the same time, few people are working on the issue.
We go into more depth in our write-up of improving institutional decision-making.
Another example is that we could try to make it easier for civilisation to rebound from a
catastrophe. The Global Seed Vault is a frozen vault in the Arctic, which contains the
seeds of many important crop varieties, reducing the chance we lose an important
species. Melting water recently entered the tunnel leading to the vault due, ironically,
to climate change, so could probably use more funding. There are lots of other projects
like this we could do to preserve knowledge.
Similarly, we could create better disaster shelters, which would reduce the chance of
extinction from pandemics, nuclear winter and asteroids (though not AI), while also
increasing the chance of a recovery after a disaster. Right now, these measures don’t
seem as effective as reducing the risks in the first place, but they still help. A more
neglected, and perhaps much cheaper option is to create alternative food sources,
such as those that can be produced without light, and could be quickly scaled up in a
prolonged winter.
Since broad efforts help even if we’re not sure about the details of the risks, they’re
more attractive the more uncertain you are. As you get closer to the risks, you should
gradually reallocate resources from broad to targeted efforts (read more).
We expect there are many more promising broad interventions, but it’s an area where
little research has been done. For instance, another approach could involve improving
international coordination. Since these risks are caused by humanity, they can be
prevented by humanity, but what stops us is the difficulty of coordination. For instance,
Russia doesn’t want to disarm because it would put it at a disadvantage compared to
the US, and vice versa, even though both countries would be better off if there were no
possibility of nuclear war.

However, it might be possible to improve our ability to coordinate as a civilisation, such
as by improving foreign relations or developing better international institutions. We’re
keen to see more research into these kinds of proposals.
Mainstream efforts to do good like improving education and international
development can also help to make society more resilient and wise, and so also
contribute to reducing catastrophic risks. For instance, a better educated population
would probably elect more enlightened leaders (cough), and richer countries are, all
else equal, better able to prevent pandemics — it’s no accident that Ebola took hold in
some of the poorest parts of West Africa.
But, we don’t see education and health as the best areas to focus on for two reasons.
First, these areas are far less neglected than the more unconventional approaches
we’ve covered. In fact, improving education is perhaps the most popular cause for
people who want to do good, and in the US alone, receives $800 billion of government
funding, and another trillion dollars of private funding. Second, these approaches have
much more diffuse effects on reducing these risks — you’d have to improve education
on a very large scale to have any noticeable effect. We prefer to focus on more
targeted and neglected solutions.
3. Learning more and building capacity
We’re highly uncertain about which risks are biggest, what is best to do about them,
and whether our whole picture of global priorities might be totally wrong. This means
that another key goal is to learn more about all of these issues.
We can learn more by simply trying to reduce these risks and seeing what progress can
be made. However, we think the most neglected and important way to learn more right
now is to do global priorities research.
This is a combination of economics and moral philosophy, which aims to answer
high-level questions about the most important issues for humanity. There are only a
handful of researchers working full-time on these issues.
Another way to handle uncertainty is to build up resources that can be deployed in the
future when you have more information. One way of doing this is to earn and save
money. You can also invest in your career capital, especially your transferable skills and
influential connections, so that you can achieve more in the future.
However, we think that a potentially better approach than either of these is to build a
communitythat’s focused on reducing these risks, whatever they turn out to be. The
reason this can be better is that it’s possible to grow the capacity of a community faster
than you can grow your individual wealth or career capital. For instance, if you spent a
year doing targeted one-on-one outreach, it’s not out of the question to find one other

person with relevant expertise to join you. This would be an annual return to the cause
of about 100%.
Right now, we are focused on building the effective altruism community, which contains
many people who want to reduce these risks. Moreover, the recent rate of growth, and
studies of specific efforts to grow the community, suggest that high rates of return are
possible.
However, we expect that other community building efforts will also be valuable. It
would be great to see a community of scientists trying to promote a culture of safety in
academia. It would be great to see a community of policymakers who want to try to
reduce these risks, and make government have more concern for future generations.
Given how few people actively work on reducing these risks, we expect that there’s a
lot that could be done to build a movement around them.
In total, how effective is it to reduce these risks?
Considering all the approaches to reducing these risks, and how few resources are
devoted to some of them, it seems like substantial progress is possible.
In fact, even if we only consider the impact of these risks on thepresentgeneration
(ignoring any benefits to future generations), they’re plausibly the top priority.
Here are some very rough and simplified figures, just to illustrate how this could be
possible. It seems plausible to us that $100 billion spent on reducing existential risk
could reduce it by over 1% over the next century. A one percentage point reduction in
the risk would be expected to save about 100 million lives among the present
generation (1% of about 10 billion people alive today). This would mean the
investment would save lives for only $1,000 per person.
Greg Lewis has made a more detailed estimate, arriving at a mean of $9,200 per life
year saved in the present generation (or ~$300,000 per life). There are also more
estimates in the thread. We think Greg is likely too conservative, because he assumes
the risk of extinction is only 1% over the next century, when our estimate is that it’s
several times higher. We also think the next billion dollars spent on reducing existential
risk could cause a larger reduction in the risk than Greg assumes (note that this is only
true if the billion were spent on the most neglected issues like AI safety and biorisk). As
a result we wouldn’t be surprised if the cost per present lives saved for the next one
billion dollars invested in reducing existential risk were under $100.
GiveWell’s top recommended charity, Against Malaria Foundation (AMF), is often
presented as one of the best ways to help the present generation and saves lives for
around $7,500 (2017 figures). So these estimates would put existential risk reduction as

better or in the same ballpark cost-effectiveness as AMF for saving lives in the present
generation — a charity that was specifically selected for being outstanding on that
dimension.
Likewise, we think that if 10,000 talented young people focused their careers on these
risks, they could achieve something like a 1% reduction in the risks. That would mean
that each person would save 1,000 lives in expectation over their careers in the present
generation, which is probably better than what they could save by earning to give and
donating to the Against Malaria Foundation.34
In one sense, these are unfair comparisons, because GiveWell’s estimate is far more
solid and well-researched, whereas our estimate is more of an informed guess. There
may also be better ways to help the present generation than AMF (e.g. policy
advocacy).
However, we’ve alsodramaticallyunderstated the benefits of reducing existential risks.
The main reason to safeguard civilisation is not to benefit the present generation, but
to benefit future generations. We ignored them in this estimate.
If we also consider future generations, then the effectiveness of reducing existential
risks is orders of magnitude higher, and it’s hard to imagine a more urgent priority right
now.
Now you can either read some responses to these arguments, or skip ahead to
practical ways to contribute.
Who shouldn’tprioritise safeguarding the future?
The arguments presented rest on some assumptions that not everyone will accept.
Here we present some of the better responses to these arguments.
You need to focus more on your friends and family
We’re only talking about what the priority should be if you are trying to help people in
general, treating everyone’s interests as equal (what philosophers sometimes call
“impartial altruism”).
34If you donate $1 million over your life, about a third of the income of the mean college graduate, and
we use the cost per life saved for Against Malaria Foundation, that would save about 130 lives.
Source for income of college grads: Carnevale, Anthony P., Stephen J. Rose, and Ban Cheah. “The
college payoff: Education, occupations, lifetime earnings.” (2011).Archived link, retrieved
21-October-2017.

Most people care about helping others to some degree: if you can help a stranger with
little cost, that’s a good thing to do. People also care about making their own lives go
well, and looking after their friends and family, and we’re the same.
How to balance these priorities is a difficult question. If you’re in the fortunate position
to be able to contribute to helping the world, then we think safeguarding the future
should be where to focus. We list concrete ways to get involved in the next section.
Otherwise, you might need to focus on your personal life right now, contributing on the
side, or in the future.
You think the risks are much lower than we’ve argued
We don’t have robust estimates of many of the human-caused risks, so you could try to
make your own estimates and conclude that they’re much lower than we’ve made out.
If they were sufficiently low, then reducing them would cease to be the top priority.
We don’t find this plausible for the reasons covered. If you consider all the potential
risks, it seems hard to be confident they’re under 1% over the century, and even a 1%
risk probably warrants much more action than we currently see.
You think there’s almost nothing more we can do about the risks
We rate these risks as less “solvable” than issues like global health, so expect progress
to be harder per dollar. That said, we think their scale and neglectedness more than
makes up for this, and so they end up more effective in expectation. Many people think
effective altruism is about only supporting “proven” interventions, but that’s a myth. It’s
worth taking interventions that only have a small chance of paying off, if the upside is
high enough. The leading funder in the community now advocates an approach of
hits-based giving.
However, if you weremuchmore pessimistic about the chances of progress than us,
then it might be better to work on more conventional issues, such as global health.
Personally, we might switch to a different issue if there were two orders of magnitude
more resources invested in reducing these risks. But that’s a long way off from today.
A related response is that we’re already taking the best interventions to reduce these
risks. This would mean that the risks don’t warrant a change in practical priorities. For
instance, we mentioned earlier that education probably helps to reduce the risks. If you

thought education was thebestresponse (perhaps because you’re very uncertain which
risks will be most urgent), then because we already invest a huge amount in education,
you might think the situation is already handled. We don’t find this plausible because,
as listed, there are lots of untaken opportunities to reduce these risks that seem more
targeted and neglected.
Another example like this is that economists sometimes claim that we should just focus
on economic growth, since that will put us in the best possible position to handle the
risks in the future. We don’t find this plausible because some types of economic growth
increase the risks (e.g. the discovery of new weapons), so it’s unclear that economic
growth is a top way to reduce the risks. Instead, we’d at least focus on differential
technological development, or the other more targeted efforts listed above.
You think there’s a better way of helping the future
Although reducing these risks is worth it for the present generation, much of their
importance comes from their long-term effects — once civilisation ends, we give up
the entire future.
You might think there are other actions the present generation could take that would
have very long-term effects, and these could be similarly important to reducing the risk
of extinction. In particular, we might be able to improve thequalityof the future by
preventing our civilization from getting locked into bad outcomes permanently.
This is going to get a bit sci-fi, but bear with us. One possibility that has been floated is
that new technology, like extreme surveillance or psychological conditioning, could
make it possible to create a totalitarian government that could never be ended. This
would be the1984andBrave New Worldscenario respectively. If this government
were bad, then civilisation might have a fateworsethan extinction by causing us to
suffer for millennia.
Others have raised the concern that the development of advanced AI systems could
cause terrible harm if it is done irresponsibly, perhaps because there is a conflict
between several groups raising to develop the technology. In particular, if at some
point in the future, developing these systems involves the creation of sentient digital
minds, their wellbeing could become incredibly important.
Risks of a future that contains an astronomical amount of suffering have been called
“s-risks.” If there is something we can do today to prevent an s-risk from happening (for

instance, through targeted research in technical AI safety and AI governance), it could
be even more important.
Another area to look at is major technological transitions. We’ve mentioned the
dangers of genetic engineering and artificial intelligence in this piece, but these
technologies could also create a second industrial revolution and do a huge amount of
good once deployed. There might be things we can do to increase the likelihood of a
good transition, rather than decrease the risk of a bad transition. This has been called
trying to increase “existential hope” rather than decrease “existential risk.”34
We agree that there might be other ways that we can have very long-term effects, and
these might be more pressing than reducing the risk of extinction. However, most of
these proposals are not yet as well worked out, and we’re not sure about what to do
about them.
The main practical upshot of considering these other ways to impact the future, is that
we think it’seven moreimportant to positively manage the transition to new
transformative technologies, like AI. It also makes us keener to see more global
priorities research looking into these issues.
Overall, we still think it makes sense to first focus on reducing existential risks, and then
after that, we can turn our attention to other ways to help the future.
One way to help the future wedon’tthink is a contender is speeding it up. Some
people who want to help the future focus on bringing about technological progress,
like developing new vaccines, and it’s true that these create long-term benefits.
However, we think what most matters from a long-term perspective is where we end
up, rather than how fast we get there. Discovering a new vaccine probably means we
get it earlier, rather than making it happen at all.
Moreover, since technology is also the cause of many of these risks, it’s not clear how
much speeding it up helps in the short-term.
Speeding up progress is also far less neglected, since it benefits the present
generation too. As we covered, over 1 trillion dollars is spent each year on R&D to
develop new technology. So, speed-ups are both less important and less neglected.
To read more about other ways of helping future generations, see Chapter 3 ofOn the
Overwhelming Importance of Shaping the Far Futureby Dr Nick Beckstead.

You’re confident the future will be short or bad
If you think it’s virtually guaranteed that civilisation won’t last a long time, then the
value of reducing these risks is significantly reduced (though perhaps still worth taking
to help the present generation and any small number of future generations).
We agree there’s a significant chance civilisation ends soon (which is why this issue is so
important), but we also think there’s a largeenoughchance that it could last a very long
time, which makes the future worth fighting for.
Similarly, if you think it’s likely the future will be more bad than good, then the value of
reducing these risks goes down (or if we have much more obligation to reduce
suffering than increase wellbeing). We don’t think this is likely, however, because
peoplewantthe future to be good, so we’lltryto make it more good than bad. We
also think that there has been significant moral progress over the last few centuries
(due to the trends noted earlier), and we’re optimistic this will continue.
What’s more, even if you’re not sure how good the future will be, or suspect it will be
bad in ways we may be able to prevent in the future, you may want civilisation to
survive and keep its options open. People in the future will have much more time to
study whether it’s desirable for civilisation to expand, stay the same size, or shrink. If
you think there’s a good chance we will be able to act on those moral concerns, that’s a
good reason to leave any final decisions to the wisdom of future generations. Overall,
we’re highly uncertain about these big-picture questions, but that generally makes us
moreconcerned to avoid making any irreversible commitments.
Beyond that, you should likely put your attention into ways to decrease the chance that
the future will be bad, such as avoiding s-risks.
You’re confident we have much stronger moral obligations to help the
present generation
If you think we have much stronger obligations to the present generation than future
generations (such as person-affecting views of ethics), then the importance of reducing
these risks would go down. Personally, we don’t think these views are particularly
compelling.
That said, we’ve argued that even if you ignore future generations, these risks seem
worth addressing. The efforts suggested could still save the lives of the present

generation relatively cheaply, and they could avoid lots of suffering from medium-sized
disasters.
What’s more, if you’re uncertain about whether we have moral obligations to future
generations, then you should again try to keep your options open, and that means
safeguarding civilisation.
Nevertheless, if you combined the view that we don’t have large obligations to future
generations with the position that the risks are also relatively unsolvable, or that there is
no useful research to be done, then another way to help present generations could
come out on top. This might mean working on global health, mental health or
speeding up technology. Alternatively, you might think there’s another moral issue
that’s more important, such as factory farming.
Want to help reduce existential risks?
Our generation can either help cause the end of everything, or be the generation that
navigates humanity through its most dangerous period, and become one of the most
important generations in history.
We could be the generation that makes it possible to reach an amazing, flourishing
world, or that puts everything at risk.
As people who want to help the world, this is where we should focus our efforts.
If you want to focus your career on reducing existential risks and safeguarding the
future of humanity, we want to help. We’ve written an article outlining your options and
steps you can take to get started.
Once you’ve read that article, or if you’ve already thought about what you want to do,
consider talking to us one-on-one. We can help you think through decisions and
formulate your plan.
Further reading
● Read about 51 policy and research ideas for reducing existential risk.
● See the academic version of this argument in this paper by Prof. Nick Bostrom.
● Read the case for focusing on future generations.
● Read an alternative introduction to the idea that our impact on future
generations is hugely morally important — including a section on objections.
● You can hear related ideas discussed in our podcasts with Dr Toby Ord and Dr
Nick Beckstead, as well as other episodes on specific risks.

● Listen to this interview with Thomas Moynihan on the intellectual history of
existential risk.
● We also recommend our podcast with Carl Shulman on the common-sense case
for existential risk work and its practical implications.
This could be the most important century
Click to read online
Will the future of humanity be wild, or boring? It’s natural to think that if we’re trying to
be sober and measured, and predict what will really happen rather than spin an
exciting story, it’s more likely than not to be sort of… dull.
But there’s also good reason to think that that is simply impossible. The idea that
there’s a boring future that’s internally coherent is an illusion that comes from not
inspecting those scenarios too closely.
At least that is what Holden Karnofsky — founder of charity evaluator GiveWell and
foundation Open Philanthropy — argues in his new article series, “The Most Important
Century.”
The bind is this: for the first 99% of human history, the global economy (initially mostly
food production) grew very slowly: under 0.1% a year. But since the Industrial
Revolution around 1800, growth has exploded to over 2% a year.

To us in 2020, that sounds perfectly sensible and the natural order of things. But
Holden points out that in fact it’s not only unprecedented, it also can’t continue for
long.
The power of compounding increases means that to sustain 2% growth for just 10,000
years — 5% as long as humanity has already existed — would require us to turn every
individual atom in the galaxy into an economy as large as the Earth’s today. Not super
likely.
So what are the options? First, maybe growth will slow and then stop. In that case, we
live today in the single miniscule slice in the history of life during which the world
rapidly changed due to constant technological advances, before intelligent civilisation
permanently stagnated or even collapsed. What a wild time to be alive!
Alternatively, maybe growth will continue for thousands of years. In that case, we are at
the very beginning of what would necessarily have to become a stable galaxy-spanning
civilisation, harnessing the energy of entire stars among other feats of engineering. We
would then stand among the first tiny sliver of all the quadrillions of intelligent beings
who ever exist. What a wild time to be alive!
Isn’t there another option where the future feels less remarkable and our current
moment not so special?
While the full version of the argument above has a number of caveats, the short answer
is “not really.” We might be in a computer simulation and our galactic potential all an
illusion, though that’s hardly any less weird. And maybe the most exciting events won’t
happen for generations yet. But on a cosmic scale, we’d still be living around the
universe’s most remarkable time:

Holden himself was very reluctant to buy into the idea that today’s civilisation is in a
strange and privileged position, but has ultimately concluded “all possible views about
humanity’s future are wild.”
In the full series, Holden goes on to elaborate on technologies that might contribute to
making this the most important era in history, including computer systems that
automate research in science and technology, the ability to create ‘digital people’ on
computers, or transformative artificial intelligence itself — and how they might create a
world much weirder than most science fiction.
And if we simply project forward available computing power, or use expert forecasts,
we can make a good case that the chance that these technologies arrive in our
lifetimes is above 50%.
All of these technologies offer the potential for huge upsides and huge downsides.
Holden is at pains to say we should neither rejoice nor despair at the circumstance we
find ourselves in. His feeling is an “odd mix of intensity, urgency, confusion and
hesitance.” Going forward, these issues require sober forethought about how we want
the future to play out, and how we might as a species be able to steer things in that
direction.
If this sort of stuff sounds nuts to you, Holden gets it — he spent the first part of his
career focused on straightforward ways of helping people in poor countries. Of course
this sounds weird.

But he thinks that, if you keep pushing yourself to do even more good, it’s reasonable
to go from “I care about all people — even if they live on the other side of the world”
to “I care about all people — even if they haven’t been born yet” to “I care about all
people — even if they’re digital.”
If this idea is correct, what might it imply in practical terms? We’re not yet sure. You can
see more of Holden’s thoughts on the implications here in the series.
One consequence is that our actions might have huge stakes, making it even more
important to reflect on where to focus.
Some specific priorities that seem helpful include:
● AI alignment research
● Global priorities research to give us more strategic clarity
● Building communities who take this idea seriously (e.g. the effective altruism
community)
● Making it more likely that governments can make thoughtful, values-driven
decisions
But most of all, we need to take this idea more seriously and understand its
implications better.
To learn more, listen to our interview with Holden. You can also read or listen to the full
series on Holden’s blog:
● All possible views about humanity’s future are wild
● The Duplicator
● Digital people people would be an even bigger deal
● This can’t go on
● Forecasting transformative AI, part 1: what kind of AI?
● Forecasting transformative AI, part 2: what’s the burden of proof?
● Are we “trending toward” transformative AI? (How would we know?)
● Forecasting transformative AI: the “biological anchors” method in a nutshell
● AI timelines: where the arguments, and the “experts,” stand
● How to make the best of the most important century?
● Call to vigilance
Further reading
● Are we living at the most influential time in history? by Will MacAskill, with some
reasons to be sceptical about the thesis. Also see our interview with Will about
the same topic.
● Patient longtermism

● Forecasting TAI with Biological Anchors by Ajeya Cotra
● Podcast: Forecasting AI with Katja Grace
● New Report on How Much Computational Power it Takes to Match the Human
Brain by Joseph Carlsmith
● Modeling the Human Trajectory by David Roodman
● Could Advanced AI Drive Explosive Economic Growth? by Tom Davidson
● Semi-Informative Priors Over AI Timelines by Tom Davidson
Our current list of pressing world problems
Click to read online
If you want to maximise your chance of having a big positive impact with your career, we
think it’s usually best to work on a global issue that’s large in scale, solvable, and
neglected. These are not always the biggest problems in the world — rather they are the
issues that receive little attentioncomparedto how important they are and how much
can be done about them.
This page presents our current list of which world problems we think best fit this profile,
and therefore seem most promising for more people to work on right now.
We begin this page with some categories of especially pressing world problems we’ve
identified so far, which we then put in a roughly prioritised list.
We then give a longer list of global issues that also seem promising to work on (and
which could well be more promising than some of our priority problems), but which we
haven’t investigated much yet.
Finally, we talk about what, in practice, these categories might mean for your career.
What is this page based on?
Our views draw on work by the University of Oxford’s Global Priorities Institute, the
Open Philanthropy Project, and our own research. Read about a framework we use for
comparing issues, and the moral and methodological assumptions behind our views.
The most distinctive aspect of our approach is probably ‘longtermism.’ Longtermism is
the idea that because such huge numbers of individuals might live in the long-run
future, and because we think everyone’s interests matter equally, approaches to
improving the world should be evaluated mainly in terms of their potential for
long-term impact — over thousands, millions, or even billions of years.

The kinds of issues we currently prioritise most highly
Emerging technologies and global catastrophic risks
In the 1950s, large scale production of nuclear weapons meant that a few world leaders
gained, for the first time, the ability to kill hundreds of millions of people. This was a
striking milestone in a robust trend: as technology improves and the world economy
grows, it gets easier to cause destruction on an ever larger scale.
In the 21st century, we expect this trend to continue. New transformative technologies
may promise a radically better future, but also pose catastrophic risks. Mitigating these
risks, while increasing the chance these technologies allow future generations to flourish,
may be the crucial challenge of this century.
There is a growing movement working to address these issues, including new research
institutes at Cambridge, MIT, and Oxford. Nonetheless, work on mitigating many risks
remains remarkably neglected — in some cases receiving attention from only a handful of
researchers. If you can find an effective way to work on these issues, we think it may be
the most valuable thing you can do.
Building capacity to explore and solve problems
Comparing global problems involves lots of uncertainty and difficult judgement calls, and
there have been surprisingly few serious attempts to make such big picture comparisons.
And there are many global issues we haven’t yet seen investigated much at all.
For these reasons, we’re also strongly in favour of work that might help resolve some of
this uncertainty, as well as work that seems robustly useful on many different assumptions
yielding different conclusions about what’s best to work on.
One top priority in this category is to build the new field of ‘global priorities’ research, to
try to work out which global problems are most pressing and make progress on
foundational questions about how best to address them.
Another strategy is to help major existing institutions improve their capacities to make
complex decisions, and therefore navigate global challenges.
A third strategy is to build communities of people who want to do good effectively, with
the hope that they can deal with future challenges as they come. We’re especially keen
to build the effective altruism community, because it explicitly aims to work on whichever
global challenges will be most pressing in the future. We count ourselves as part of this
community because we share this aim.
Finally, we want to encourage people to explore problem areas where the case for
impact is more speculative but which might be very pressing — e.g. promoting

civilisational resilience, mitigating great power conflict, or laying the foundations for the
governance of outer space. Making progress on these issues, which are less explored
(especially from a longtermist perspective) can help establish and build these nascent
fields, or help us discover they’re less promising, meaning others can work more
productively and efficiently.
Especially pressing global issues — our current overall list
If we had to rank the problem areas we’ve investigated so far in terms of the overall
effectiveness of additional work on them (assuming someone had the same level of
personal fit for each), our ranking would be as stated below.
Note that this isnota ranking of which world problems we think are the most important
full stop,but rather a ranking of which problems we think are most pressing for people
who broadly share our values and might follow our advice to work onat the current
margin.
Partly for this reason, we expect this list to change to some extent year-to-year (perhaps
seeing the addition or subtraction of one or two issues a year) as circumstances change
— e.g. as some problems become less neglected or new issues arise.
Click through each of the links below to see our full writeups for each area — what the
issue is and why we prioritise it as highly as we do.
Highest priority areas
● Positively shaping the development of artificial intelligence
● Global priorities research
● Building effective altruism
● Reducing global catastrophic biological risks
There are also many global issues we haven’t looked into as much, but which seem like
they could be as pressing as the issues above. We’d be excited to see a substantial
minority of readers explore these issues in order to learn more about them, especially if
they have unusually good fit for working on them. For instance:
● Mitigating great power conflict
● Global governance
● Governance of outer space
● See the rest of our list of other issues that could be top priorities
There are probably still other issues we haven’t thought of, or perhaps an issue that
stands above all the others we know of in terms of how pressing it is to work on — we
call this ’cause X,’ and it is another reason to do more exploration.

Second-highest priority areas
These are global problems we’re confident are among the most pressing for more people
to work on, but for which we’d guess an additional person working on them achieves
somewhat less impact than work on our highest priorities, all else equal. Still, they could
easily be someone’s top choice depending on the circumstance.
● Nuclear security
● Improving institutional decision-making
● Climate change (extreme risks)
Together, all of the above categories make up what we call our priority problem areas or
priority problems.
Other important global issues we’ve looked into
We’d love to see more people working on these issues, but given our general worldview
they seem less pressing than our priority problems:
● Factory farming
● Health in poor countries
You can also see global issues wehaven’tlooked into, but which also seem important to
us (though likely less pressing than our priority problem areas) below.
Long lists of potentially pressing global issues beyond our current
priorities
There are many global problems we have not yet looked into at length, but which, upon
further investigation, might turn out to be very promising for people to work on. Below
we list some issues we’ve at least briefly considered.
We’d be keen to see more of our readers gain expertise and test out projects in these
areas than are currently doing so, especially within the first set of issues below. This is
both because we think it might be directly valuable (especially for people with an
unusually good personal fit for one of these areas or access to an unusually good
opportunity), and because it presents a chance to discover new highly pressing issues.
For these reasons, we expect it makes sense for a significant minority of our readers (say
10–20%) to explore new areas like those listed below rather than focusing on our current
priority problem areas. This would be the 10–20% who are relatively best suited to these
areas, which probably means those with some kind of pre-existing interest. We discuss
this more below.

Right now, we know very few people (who share our priorities) who are working on these
areas, so if you find yourself choosing between one of the issues below and one of our
highest-priority issues, and you have equally good opportunities and fit for each, we
currently think working on one of these less explored but possibly very pressing issues
could be your best bet.
We came up with this list by surveying seven advisors and combining their views with our
own judgement. We’ve added some interesting sources with arguments about the
importance of each area as leads to learn more, though we don’t always agree with
everything these sources say.
Note that the issues within each list are not in any particular order, and that there may be
some overlap between them.
Potential highest priorities
The following are some issues that seem like they might be especially pressing from the
perspective of improving the long-term future. We think these have a chance of being as
important for people to work on as our priority problems listed above, but we haven’t
investigated them enough to know.
● Great power conflict
● Global governance
● Governance of outer space
● Voting reform
● Artificial sentience
● Improving individual reasoning or cognition
● Global public goods
● Surveillance
● Atomic scale manufacturing
● Broadly promoting positive values
● Civilisation resilience
● ‘S-risks’
● Whole brain emulation
● Risks of stable totalitarianism
● Risks from malevolent actors
● Safeguarding liberal democracy
● Recommender systems at top tech firms
● We may need to invest more now to spend enough later on future problems

We’d be excited to see more discussion and exploration of many of these areas from the
perspective of trying to improve the long-term future, and hope to help facilitate such
exploration going forward.
Other longtermist issues
We’re also interested in the following issues, but at this point think that work on them is
likely somewhat less effective for substantially improving the long-term future than work
on the issues listed above.
● Economic growth
● Science policy and infrastructure
● Harmful restrictions on migration
● Ageing
● Improving institutions to promote development
● Space settlement and terraforming
● Lie detection technology
● Wild animal welfare
Other global issues
We think the following issues are quite important from a short- or medium- term
perspective, and that work on them might well be as impactful as additional work
focused on reducing the suffering of animals from factory farming or improving global
health.
However, we don’t prioritise them as highly as those listed above because they seem
somewhat less neglected, and because work on them seems less likely to substantially
impact the very long-run future.
● Mental health
● Biomedical research and other basic science
● Increasing access to pain relief in developing countries
● Other risks from climate change
● Smoking in the developing world
● Other problems we've looked at which seem less impactful to work on than global
health

Which issue should you focus on?
Determining for yourself which issues are most pressing
We gave our best guesses above about which global problems are most pressing for
more people to work on. You might disagree, or want to do some of your own
investigation before you make any decisions.
See this brief guide to investigating for yourself which problems are most pressing, which
also links to a few other resources that can help you think things through.
Considering your personal fit
We encourage our readers to weigh how pressing a problem area is in general along with
their personal fit for the area — how successful they are likely to be compared to the
average person working on the problem, based on their skills and experience. You can
think about your expected long-term impact in an area roughly as the product of how
pressing the problem is that you’re working on and how much you in particular will be
able to contribute to solving it.
If you’re coordinating as a part of a community, considering your comparative advantage
— your fit for different areas compared to the community as a whole — may also be
important.
For more on how to assess your personal fit and related topics, see our article Personal
fit: why being good at your job is even more important than people think.
Advantages of spreading out over different issues
We do not think all our readers (let alone everyone) should work on our top ranked
problems. Differing personal fit alone would mean that our readers should spread out
over different problem areas, even if they were to all agree with our ranking of the
general pressingness of the issues.
Moreover, as we gain more readers, there will be additional reasons for them to spread
out. Two of the most important reasons are:
● As more people work on an issue, there are diminishing returns to additional work.
This means that a group of people that’s large compared to the capacity of an
issue to absorb people will start to run out of fruitful opportunities to make
progress on that issue, making it better for them to be spread out into other areas.
● If you work with others, there is value of information in exploring new world
problems — if you explore an area and find out that it’s promising, other people
can enter it as well.

We cover this subject in more detail in our article on community coordination.
Among people who follow our advice, we aim to help a majority shoot for one of the
highest-priority problem areas we listed above, but we’d also like to see a significant
fraction aim for opportunities in the second and third groups. As we said above, we also
think that some of our readers — perhaps 10–20% — will likely have the most impact by
working on other global issues, especially those we list as potentially as pressing as our
highest priority areas.
We think the reasons to spread out over different problem areas also apply to people
aiming to take an ‘effective altruism’ approach to doing good — perhaps even moreso.
For instance, if the effective altruism community becomes associated with a single issue,
that could reduce its potential to grow and adapt in the future, which is an additional
reason for people who take this approach to work on a variety of problem areas.
All that said, we think our highest-priority areas are currently neglected relative to how
important they are, even within the effective altruism community, so we plan to continue
to focus most of our efforts on them for now.
How do our organisational priorities overlap with these lists?
As a team, we also have limited capacity to provide advice and research. So, we try to
focus a majority of our effort on our highest-priority areas. We then aim to put a smaller
amount of effort into the second-highest-priority areas, and the remainder into other
issues. For instance, most of our advising is focused on our highest-priority areas, but we
also cover many other global issues on our podcast.
As our staff and readership grows, or if in the future our highest-priority problems
become less neglected or we learn more about other pressing problems, we may
prioritise a wider range of issues.
Other key articles on global priorities
● A framework for comparing global problems
● The story of how our views about which problem to focus on have changed over
time
● How to compare global problems for yourself

4. Solutions: how can you find the most
effective ways to tackle your chosen
problem?
The best solutions are far more effective than
others
Click to read online
Scared Straight was a government programme that received billions of dollars of
funding, and was profiled in an award-winning documentary. The idea was to take kids
who committed crimes, show them life in jail, and scare them into embracing the
straight and narrow.
The only problem? One meta-analysis found the programme made the kidsmorelikely
to commit crimes, and another more recent meta-analysis found it had no effect.35
Causing this much harm is rare, but when social programmes are rigorously tested, a
large fraction of them don’t work.36
So, even if you’ve chosen a pressing issue, it would be easy to end up working on a
solution to it that has very little impact.
Meanwhile, research finds that among solutions that do have positive effects, the best
interventions within an area arefarmore cost effective than average, often achieving
over 10 and sometimes 100 times as much for a given unit of resources.
In this article, we explain what we think the current research implies about how much
solutions differ in effectiveness, why this should change how we approach making a
difference, and how to find the best solutions within an area of practice.
35van der Put, Claudia E., et al. “Effects of awareness programs on juvenile delinquency: A three-level
meta-analysis.”International Journal of OffenderTherapy and Comparative Criminology, vol. 65, no.1,
1996, pp. 68-91.Archived link. Petrosino, Anthony,et al. “Scared Straight and other juvenile awareness
programs for preventing juvenile delinquency: A systematic review.”Campbell Systematic Reviews, vol.
9, no.1, (2013), pp. 1-55.Archived link.
36The percentage that work or don’t work depends a lot on how you define it, but it’s likely that a
majority don’t have statistically significant effects.

How much do solutions differ in how well they work?
In recent years there’s been a wave of advocacy to stop the use of plastic bags.
However, convincing someone to entirely give up plastic bagsfor the rest of their life
(about 10,000 bags) would avoid about 0.1 tonnes of CO2 emissions. In contrast,
convincing someone to take justone fewertransatlantic flight would reduce CO2
emissions by over one tonne — more than 10 times as much.37
And rather than trying to change personal consumption in the first place, we’d argue
you could do even more to reduce emissions by advocating for greater funding of
neglected green technology.
This pattern doesn’t just hold within climate change. Its significance was first pointed
out in the field of global health by Toby Ord’s article, The Moral Imperative toward
Cost-Effectiveness in Global Health.
He found data that compared different health interventions in poor countries (e.g.
malaria nets, vaccines, types of surgery) in terms of how many years of healthy life they
produce per $1,000 invested.
This data showed that the most cost-effective interventions were around 50 times as
cost effective as the median, 23 times the mean, and almost exactly obeyed the 80/20
rule.
Intervention cost effectiveness in global health in order of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) per
$1,000 on the y-axis, from the DCP2.
37According to the 2020 Founders PledgeClimate & Lifestyle Report, just one round trip transatlantic
flight contributes 1.6 tonnes of CO2. Figure 2 of the same report shows the comparatively negligible
effect of reusing plastic bags.

This is an incredible finding, because it suggests that one person working on the most
effective interventions within global health could achieve as much as 50 people
working on a typical intervention.
We’ve since seem similar patterns among:
● Large US social programmes
● Other global health datasets, such as WHO CHOICE and the DCP3.
● Public health in rich countries
● Education interventions in developing countries
● Ways to alter meat consumption to reduce animal suffering
● Policies to reduce CO2 emissions
In fact, it seems to show up wherever we have data.
There are some reasons to think that this data overstates the true differences in
effectiveness between different solutions — especially those that you can actually work
on going forward.
One reason is that often the very top solutions in an area are already being done by
someone else.
A more subtle reason is regression to the mean. All the estimates involve a lot of
uncertainty and error. Some interventions will ‘get lucky’ and end up with errors that
make them look better than they are, and others will be unlucky and look worse.
In fact, even if all the solutions were equally effective, random errors would make some
look above average, and others below average.
If we compare the interventions that appear best compared to the average, it’s more
likely that they benefited from positive errors. This means that if we investigate them
more, they’ll probably turn out worse than they seem.
This is what seems to have happened in practice. For instance, the data that Toby used
found that deworming children was among the most cost-effective solutions in the
dataset. However, the charity evaluator GiveWell discovered errors in the estimates in
the study, and the studies behind them have been called into question in a debate that
became known as the ‘Worm Wars.’
But here’s the final twist: in 2021, after 10 years of further research and scrutiny aiming
to correct for these effects, GiveWell still recommends deworming charities as among
the most cost effective in global health. This is true even though their best guess is that
deworming is only about 10% as cost effective as the original estimates.

So, the original estimates were too optimistic, and overstated the spread from best to
typical, but deworming still appears to be much more cost effective than average —
likely still over 10 times better.
In fact, global health experts still believe that the best ways of saving lives in poor
countries are around 100 times cheaper than the average.38
On the other hand, the data in these studies could alsounderstatethe true differences
in effectiveness between solutions. One reason is that the data only covers solutions
with easy-to-measure results that can be studied in trials, but the highest-impact ways
of doing good in the past most often involved research or advocacy, rather than
measurable interventions. This would mean the very best solutions are missing from the
datasets.
For instance, a comparatively small number of people worked on the development of
oral rehydration therapy, which now saves around one million lives per year. This
research was likely extremely cost effective, but we couldn’t directly measure its
effectiveness before it was done.
Looking forward, we think there’s a good case that medical research aimed at helping
the global poor will ultimately be more cost effective than spending on direct
treatments, increasing the overall degree of spread.
There’s a lot more to say about how much solutions differ in effectiveness, and we’d
like to see more research on it. However, our overall judgement is that it’s often
possible to find solutions that bring about 10 times as much progress per year of effort
than other commonly supported solutions in an area, and it’s sometimes possible to
find solutions that achieve 100 times as much.
Technical aside: theoretical arguments about how much solutions differ
You might think that it’s surprising that such large differences exist. But there are some
theoretical arguments that it’s what we should expect:
● There isn’t much reason to expect the world of doing good to be ‘efficient’ in
the same way that financial markets are, because there are only very weak
feedback loops between having an impact and gaining more resources. The
main reward people get from doing good is often praise and a sense of
satisfaction, but these don’t track the actions that are most effective. We don’t
expect it to be entirely inefficient either — even a small number of
effectiveness-minded actors can take the best opportunities — but we shouldn’t
be surprised to find large differences.
38Caviola, Lucius, et al. “Donors vastly underestimate differences in charities’ effectiveness.”Judgment
and Decision Making, vol. 15, no. 4, 2020, pp. 509-516.Link

● A relatively simple model can give a large spread. For instance, cost
effectiveness is produced by the multiple of two factors; we’d expect it to have a
log-normal distribution, which is heavy-tailed.
● Heavy-tailed distributions seem the norm in many similar cases, for instance how
much different experts produce in a field, which means we shouldn’t be
surprised if they come up in the world of doing good.
● If we think there’s some chance the distribution is heavy-tailed and some chance
it’s normally distributed, then in expectation it will be heavy-tailed, and we
should act as if it is.
What do these findings imply?
If you’re trying to tackle a problem, it’s vital to look for thevery bestsolutions in an
area, rather than those that are just ‘good.’
This contrasts with the common attitude that what matters is trying to ‘makea
difference,’ or that ‘every little bit helps.’ If some solutions achieve 100 times more per
year of effort, then it really matters that we try to find those that makethe most
difference to the problem.
This is why we highlight finding an effective solution as one of the four key drivers of
your long-term impact, along with how pressing the problem is, how much leverage
you have, and your degree of personal fit. It can be worth working on a less effective
solution if that path does well on the other three factors, but it’s one key thing to
consider, especially once you reach the stage of your career where you’re trying to
directly tackle problems rather than build career capital.
So, how can we find the most effective solutions in an area?
Hits-based vs evidence-based approaches
There are two broad approaches among our readers:
1. The evidence-based approach: look for data about how much progress per
dollar different solutions achieve, ideally randomised trials, and focus on the
best ones.
2. The hits-based approach: look for rules of thumb that make a solution more
likely to be among the very best in an area, while accepting that most of the
solutions will be duds.

We generally favour the hits-based approach, especially for individuals rather than
large institutions, and people who are able to stay motivated despite a high chance of
failure.
Why? As noted, the best solutions typically can’t be measured with trials, and so will be
automatically excluded if you take the evidence-based approach. This is a serious
problem because if the best solutions are far more effective than typical, it could be
better to pick randomly among solutions thatmightbe the very best, rather than to
pick something that’s very likely to be better than average but definitely not among the
very best.
Another argument is that many institutions with social missions seem overly risk-averse.
For instance, government grant agencies get criticised heavily for funding failures, but
the employees at such agencies don’t get much reward when they back winners. This
suggests that individuals who are willing to take risks can get an edge by supporting
solutions that have a high chance of not working. You can read more about the
arguments for a hits-based approach.
One response to the hits-based approach is that it relies on deeply uncertain
judgement calls, instead of objective evidence. That’s true, but we contend that you
can’t escape relying on judgement calls. All our actions lead to ripple effects lasting
long into the future. By taking an evidence-based approach, even if we suppose the
evidence is fully reliable, at best you can measure some of the short-term effects, but
you’ll need to rely on judgement calls about the longer-term effects, which comprise
the majority of all the effects. Learn more about cluelessness.
Given that judgement calls are unavoidable, the best we can do is to try to make the
best judgement calls possible, using the best available techniques.
What does taking a hits-based approach involve in practice?
In short, we need to seek rules of thumb that make a solution more likely to be among
the very best in an area (while unlikely to be negative). This could involve methods like
the following:
● Upside/downside analysis: look for solutions with potentially very high upsides
(and limited downsides).
● Apply the importance, neglectedness, and tractability framework, but at the
level of solutions rather than problems. Here’s an example of this kind of analysis
within climate change by Founders Pledge.
● Make rough back-of-the-envelope estimates of progress per year. Even when
the estimates are very uncertain, they can still help us spot very large differences

in effectiveness. You can further improve your estimates by applying best
practices in forecasting. See some examples by the Open Philanthropy Project.
● Bottleneck analysis: try to identify the key step that would unlock progress in an
area. For instance, in new areas, it’s often most important to do direction-setting
research and demonstrate progress is possible; then the priority becomes
building a movement around the issue and scaling up the best solutions.
● Develop a theory of change.
In practice, this often ends up with a focus on research, movement building, policy
change, or social advocacy, and on solutions that are unfairly neglected or seem
unconventional.
In applying these frameworks, you can either try to do this analysis yourself, or find
experts in the area who understand the need to prioritise and can do the analysis on
your behalf (or a mix of both).
We’re generalists rather than experts in the areas we recommend, so we mainly try to
identify good experts — such as those on our podcast — and synthesise their views
about how to tackle the problems we write about in our problem profiles.
If you aim your career at tackling a specific issue, however, then you’ll probably end up
knowing more about it than us, and so should put more weight on your own analysis.
Many of the areas we recommend are also small, so not much is known about how best
to tackle them. This makes it easier than it seems to become an expert. It also means
that your input on which solutions are best is especially valuable.
Following expert views also doesn’t necessarily mean choosing ‘consensus’ picks,
because those might fall into the trap of being pretty good but not best. Rather, if a
minority of experts strongly supports an intervention (and the others don’t think it’s
harmful), that might be enough to make it worth betting on. In brief, we aim to
consider both thestrengthof views andhow goodthe interventions seem, and are
willing to bet on something contrarian if the upsides might be high enough.
For example, Sophie Rose switched to studying pandemic prevention due to our
advice. When COVID-19 broke out, she realised human challenge trials could speed up
vaccine development by many months, saving millions of lives. They also had a lot of
public support, but weren’t being permitted by regulators. So she co-founded
1DaySooner, which signed up volunteers for such trials, and one was eventually started
in London in early 2021.
This didn’t turn out to be fast enough to make a noticeable difference to the COVID-19
outbreak, but we think it was a bet worth taking.

More importantly, if there’s another pandemic, 1DaySooner’s work means human
challenge trials could be ready to go right away, enabling us to develop vaccines far
faster.
Further reading
● Is it fair to say most social programmes don’t work?
● Hits-based giving — a blog post by Holden Karnofsky at Open Philanthropy.
● Improving global health in clear and direct ways — podcast with Alexander
Berger from Open Philanthropy, where he compares evidence-based ways to
reduce global poverty with hits-based ones. He claims that while the best
hits-based approaches are sometimes better, they can’t find enough of them to
deploy their entire budget, so they also support evidence-based ones.
● Do social science findings generalise? — a podcast with Eva Vivalt
● Expected value estimates you can take (somewhat) literally
— a blog post by Greg Lewis, which explains one way we might try to correct for
regression to the mean.
Other key articles on effective solutions
● Is it fair to say that most social programmes don’t work?

5. Leverage: which careers are highest
impact?
What is leverage, and how can you get it?
Click to read online
People who want to have an impact often focus on jobs in which they help people
directly — for instance, teaching and healthcare are two of the most common paths for
college graduates.
So we worked with a medic, Greg Lewis, to estimate the number of lives saved by a
typical clinical doctor. Greg estimated that the average doctor in a country like the US
or UK adds several hundred years of healthy life over their career — equivalent to
saving several lives. This is a lot of impact compared to most jobs, but it’s less than
many expect.
One reason is, as we’ve seen, issues like health in rich countries already receive a lot of
attention. In this article, we’ll discuss another reason: the impact of a clinical doctor is
limited by the number of people they can treat with their own hands. In other words,
this path has limitedleverage.
By ‘leverage,’ we mean how many resources you’re able to bring to bear on the best
solutions to the most pressing problems.
Greg decided to switch to studying public health to research changes to government
policy to prevent catastrophic pandemics. As a medic, he could respond to a pandemic
by treating infected patients. But by working to improve pandemic policy, he can help
make the efforts of thousands of doctors more efficient, and these efforts could also be
directed to preventing another pandemic in the first place.
There are lots of career paths that give you more leverage, and we’ll cover several
more examples in this article.
The idea is not that the more indirect path is always better, but rather that you don’t
haveto become a doctor, teacher, or charity worker to do good. By considering a
broader range of ways to contribute, including indirect ones, you give yourself many
more options, making it easier to find a path that’s a good fit.
Also, more indirect paths can sometimes allow you to effect change at a greater scale,
so it’soneroute to having a bigger impact.

Ways to increase your leverage
Once you’ve picked a problem to focus on and identified some promising solutions,
you need to choose a career that will let you make them happen.
Some careers give you more leverage — and therefore let you put more resources
toward great solutions than others.
To be a little more precise, when tackling a problem you can divide your impact into:
1. The effectiveness of the solution — how much progress you get per unit of
resources invested.
2. Your leverage — howmanyresources you’re able to get invested in the
problem.
Your impact is given by the multiple of the two.
These resources could be your money, your own labour, the labour of others you
enable, the budgets of large organisations you’re able to influence, the power of a
government you can help shape, and so on.
How much leverage you have in a job is usually a product of both the job itself and
your personal fit.
The line between ‘effective solutions’ and ‘leverage’ is blurry. For instance, you can
think of research either as a way of getting leverage or an especially effective type of
solution. But it’s normally useful to roughly divide them. If the best solution is research,
you will want to consider whether you can get more research done by doing the
research yourself or enabling other researchers to achieve more — e.g. as a research
manager, by funding research, by lobbying the government to improve policy that
influences research, and so on.
To illustrate this idea, it’s perhaps easiest to give some examples of ways our readers
have increased their leverage.
Improving government
Suzy Deuster wanted to become a public defender to ensure disadvantaged people
have good legal defence. But she realised that while that path might improve criminal
justice for perhaps hundreds of people over her career, by changing policy she might
improve the justice system for thousands or even millions. She was able to use her
legal background to start a career in policy, and now works in the Executive Office of
the President of the US on criminal justice reform, and from there can explore other
areas of policy in the future.

When we think of careers that ‘do good,’ we might not first think of becoming an
unknown government bureaucrat. But senior government officials often oversee
budgets of tens or even hundreds of millions — if you could enable those budgets to
be spent just a couple of percent better, that would be worth millions of dollars of
government revenue. And at the same time, government is often crucial in addressing
many of the issues we most recommend people work on.
You can make a similar argument about helping to improve other large institutions, like
philanthropic foundations or scientific grantmaking bodies. Most researchers want to
focus on research, rather than administering grants, so these positions are often
neglected. But grantmakers can influence how tens of millions of dollars are allocated
— by improving that, you could enable more effective research to be done than you
could achieve yourself.
Mobilising others
Suppose you’ve discovered an impactful job, but you’re not sure you’re a good fit. If
you can instead find someone else to take it, then you’ve had just as much impact, if
not more, compared to taking it yourself.
This is an example of being amultiplier— it’s often possible to have a greater impact
through enabling others than you can achieve directly. And that’s another way to have
leverage.
This was the original motivation for founding 80,000 Hours itself: we thought that if we
could help just a couple of people have high-impact careers, that would do several
times as much good as pursuing those careers ourselves.
While some jobs specialise in community building, you can pursue community building
in any job — this illustrates why we shouldn’t think of impactful jobs in terms of specific
roles, but rather in terms of how youbest useyour role to do good. Learn more about
how to do good in any job.
You can make a similar argument for careers in communication. By building an
audience as a podcast host, journalist, or author, or by working in media, you can help
spread important but neglected ideas to thousands of people — helping to mobilise
their efforts or make them more effective.
Helping other people with leverage
If you know a person or an organisation that has leverage they’re using to tackle a
pressing problem, you can lend your skills to help further their impact.

For instance, Kyle had just graduated and was wondering about becoming a career
counsellor or earning to give in the corporate world. Instead he decided to gamble on
moving to Oxford to help the effective altruism research community there. He
eventually became Nick Bostrom’s assistant — a researcher he thinks is doing
world-changing work. His thinking was that if he could save Bostrom 10% of his time on
top of what he’d save with his next-best assistant, then he would enable him to
perform 10% more research, contributing to the world-changing work.
Later Kyle moved into operations management, helping research organisations in the
San Francisco Bay Area run more efficiently and grow faster. This also illustrates how
helping to build organisations can be a route to leverage, since a well-run organisation
can enable tens or hundreds of people to work together.
We list open positions in high-impact organisations on our job board, which need all
kinds of skills, including marketing, research, data science, engineering, operations,
personal assistants, management, and so on.
A special case of this kind is to help start new organisations. If you’re able to build
something that can hire people and continue without you, then you’ve multiplied your
efforts — the organisation will be able to do more than you would ever be able to do
with just your own hands.
Donating money
Another form of leverage comes from money: donations can be targeted at the most
effective organisations in the world that are most in need of funding. You might not
want to work at a nonprofit yourself, but by working in (for example) software
engineering or accounting and donating some of your income, you might be able to
fund the salaries of several nonprofit workers.
More broadly, if you have a very specific skillset — or don’t want to change your career
— by earning and donating money, you can ‘convert’ your skills into skilled labour
working on the most pressing issues. The more you’re able to donate, the more
leverage this gives you.
We call this ‘earning to give’ — finding a career that uses your strengths and allows you
to donate more, even if its direct impact is only neutral.
An extreme example of earning to give is Sam Bankman-Fried. He learned about the
arguments for earning to give when he attended a talk by one of our founders while
studying physics as an undergraduate at MIT.
Through others he met in our community, Sam found a job that used his mathematical
skills in quantitative trading at Jane Street Capital, and that was a great fit. From there,

he went on to help found cryptocurrency derivatives exchange FTX and build the
decentralised finance movement.
Now, Forbes estimates Sam’s net worth is $16 billion, making him likely the world’s
wealthiest person under 30. That’s a lot of resources, making Sam’s path so far very
high leverage indeed. Sam has already donated millions to causes like animal welfare
and the Biden campaign, and intends to donate most of his future wealth — enough to
fund thousands of others doing high-impact work.
Sam took earning to give to the extreme. Going from a
physics undergrad to a pioneer in decentralised finance in
less than a decade, Sam is now worth billions — which he
plans to give away.
Over 500 of our readers are also pursuing earning to give on a more modest scale. For
example, John Yan decided that he could best contribute by staying in his current job
(software engineering) and donating 10–30% of his income to effective charities.
Collectively the contributions of these readers will add up to tens of millions of dollars
in donations, which can do a huge amount of good.
Through research and technology
If you discover an important idea, it can be shared with everyone for free, meaning
many more people can use their time better. The low marginal costs of spreading new
ideas is one reason why helping to develop new ideas through research can be an
impactful path.
Similarly, if you can develop a new technology that can be easily copied and shared,
you can enable millions of others to achieve more.
You don’t have to invent these ideas yourself to have a big impact — as we covered
earlier, you can help more discoveries be made by building organisations, being a
multiplier, and providing funding to support others in innovation.
Building your skills
You can also increase your leverage by developing skills that are more valuable to the
issues you want to tackle.

One highly skilled person might cover the ground of several, giving them several times
as much leverage.
You can increase the value of your skills by:
● Learning skills that are especially needed in the problem you want to work on
● Learning skills that fit you better — we cover personal fit elsewhere.
● Practising and training to increase your skills
Remember that getting leverage takes time. While many young people want to have a
big impact right away, research finds that most people reach their peak output at age
40–60. We discuss how to increase your leverage by investing in your career capital in
an upcoming article.
Conclusion
When aiming to do good, we typically first think of ways to contribute directly.
But often more indirect routes, like policy change or research, can let you reach a
greater scale of impact.
And in fact, you can use almost any role to contribute to a pressing problem via
community building, spreading important ideas, or donating. We normally think of
‘social impact careers’ in terms of specific job titles (e.g. working in corporate social
responsibility or at a social impact organisation), but this shows thathow you useyour
current role is at least as important as what role you have.
These more indirect paths don’t always produce as much ‘warm glow’ as helping
directly, but if you might be able to have a bigger impact, they’re worth taking
seriously.
These indirect paths might also fit you better in other ways, like being more
intellectually interesting, or letting you work with colleagues you like. The warm glow of
helping directly is not the only way to make a career satisfying and meaningful.
In general, by considering a much wider range of ways to contribute, it’s often possible
to find a path that’s better overall — both for you and in terms of impact.
Our list of high-impact careers
Click to read online
The highest-impact career for you is the one that allows you to make the biggest
contribution to solving one of the world’s most pressing problems. On this page, we

list some broad categories of impactful careers, followed by about 30 more specific
and unusual career paths we think are especially impactful, such as long-term AI policy
research. The lists are based on 10 years of research and experience advising people,
and represent the careers it seems to us will be most impactful over the long run if you
get started on them now — though of course we can’t be sure what the future holds.
You can use the lists on this page to get new ideas for impactful careers and make sure
you haven’t missed a great option. Then select between them primarily based on your
fit — see our guide on how to make a career plan for details on how to choose. Click
on the profiles to learn more about why we chose each one, how to assess your fit, and
see open high-impact job opportunities.
Key categories of impactful careers
Before thinking about specific career paths, we think it’s valuable to consider whatkinds
of careers tend to be highest impact. The career categories below can enable you to
make a big contribution to whichever global problems you think are most pressing.
Government and policy in an area relevant to a top problem
Work out how government policy can help solve the world’s most pressing problems,
and help make those policies happen. Read more
Organisation-building at effective nonprofits
Help build great organisations doing important work via entrepreneurship, operations,
people management, project management, fundraising, or administration.
Read more
Research in relevant areas
Aim to make intellectual advances about how to tackle the world’s most pressing
problems. Read more
Applying an unusual skill to a needed niche
We mostly focus on more common skills, but a huge variety is needed. If you already
have expertise in a narrow area, there might be a way to apply it to a pressing global
problem. Read more
Communication
Convey important ideas and information in a compelling way, and you can help others
focus on the right things and work more effectively. Read more

Earning to give
Take a job that fits you well and lets you contribute financially to funding-constrained,
highly effective organisations. Read more
List of top-recommended career paths
If you want to help tackle the global problems we think are most pressing, these are the
career paths we most recommend — our priority paths. Most of them are difficult to
enter — you may need to start by investing in building skills for several years, and there
may be relatively few positions available. However, if you have the potential to excel in
any of these paths, we encourage you to seriously consider it.
We’ve ranked these paths roughly in terms of impact, assuming your personal fit for each
is constant. But there isa lotof variation within each path — so the best opportunities in
one lower on the list will often be better than most of the opportunities in a
higher-ranked one.
1. AI safety technical research
The development of AI could transform society. Help increase the chance it’s
positive by tackling the technical problems of AI alignment, such as ‘corrigibility,’
‘interpretability,’ and reliability.
2. Long-term AI policy strategy research and implementation
The deployment of powerful AI systems could go very well or very badly for
society. Help shape and implement policies to make it go well.
3. Founder of new projects tackling top problems
Most people can only do great work within a great organisation. Make it possible
to deploy more talent and resources toward progress on pressing global
problems.
4. Grantmaker focused on pressing world problems
Allocate philanthropic funding as effectively as possible by identifying and vetting
new organisations and projects.
5. Helping build the effective altruism community
If you could cause two other, equally talented people to use their skills to tackle
the world’s most pressing problems, that’d be double the impact you’d have if you
did it yourself.
6. Operations management in high-impact organisations
One of the biggest bottlenecks for organisations working on pressing global
problems is excellent operations staff to design, scale, and implement great
systems.

7. Research into global priorities
Help identify the most pressing global problems and the most effective ways to
solve them to enable others to have a greater impact.
8. Biorisk research, strategy, and policy
Help reduce the risk of a global biological catastrophe, like an engineered
pandemic much worse than COVID-19.
9. China-related AI safety and governance paths
Help Chinese companies and stakeholders involved in building AI make the
technology safe and good for society.
10.Forecasting and related research and implementation
Help powerful institutions make good predictions and decisions, particularly
around catastrophic risks.
Sometimes recommended: other high-impact career paths we’re
excited about
Below we list some other career paths that we don’t recommend as often or as highly as
those above, but which can still often be top options for people we advise. Take a look
and consider any that might be a good fit for you. These aren’t ranked in terms of
impact.
High-impact but especially competitive
● Historian of large societal trends, inflection points, progress, or collapse. Help
anticipate future changes to society and technology by examining the past.
● Public intellectual. Build a platform and spread important ideas about pressing
global problems and how we can best solve them.
Potentially high-impact but still under-researched
● Expert in AI hardware. Shape the course and pace of AI deployment though AI
hardware — e.g. by restricting or allowing access to compute by different actors.
● Information security. Help prevent emerging technologies like AI and biotech
from being misused, stolen, or tampered with.
● Policy careers focused on other pressing global issues. Research, promote, or
implement policies that address global issues beyond biosecurity and AI safety.
● Specialist in emerging global powers. Help emerging global powers coordinate
with the rest of the world in addressing pressing global problems.
● Manager of a long-term philanthropic fund. Help philanthropists invest
resources now in order to deploy the returns in the medium- to long-term future,
or whenever the time is right.

● Investigate a potentially pressing but unexplored global issue. See if we can
make progress on an under-researched problem that could be even more
pressing than those we currently prioritise.
Other impactful options if you’re an especially good fit
● Journalism. Spread important ideas and help shape public discourse for the
better.
● Non-technical roles in leading AI labs. You don’t have to be a technical or policy
researcher to help AI labs work toward greater safety.
● Software engineering. Use coding skills to help shape the development of AI,
prevent pandemics, and support the most impactful nonprofits.
● Research management. Multiply the impact of research by guiding,
coordinating, and promoting the best work.
● Organise an effective altruism local group. Grow the effective altruism
community by running events, mentoring, and connecting people to one
another.
● Think tank research. Improve government policies through targeted research
and advocacy.
● Found a tech startup. Get great career capital by working at a tech startup —
and if it works out, have a positive impact by donating part of your earnings.
● Academic research. Do research in academia, which is home to some of the
most far-reaching and cutting-edge research we can do.
● Mitigate climate change using effective altruist approaches. Identify and
implement the most effective solutions to climate change by focusing on the
most extreme risks and neglected technologies.
● Earn to give in a high-paying role, such as quantitative trading. Get an
extremely high-paying job, then donate some of your salary to the most
effective charities you can find.
● Become an executive assistant for someone doing especially high-impact work.
Know of someone doing very valuable work? Multiply their impact by taking
time-consuming tasks off their plate.
● Improve China-Western coordination on global catastrophic risks. The broader
version of our top-recommended path on shaping China’s involvement in AI:
help coordinate China and the West on a variety of global issues.
● Engineering. Develop and deploy potential technological solutions to important
problems.

Steps to build career capital and increase your future impact
These aren’t career paths per se, but they can be great phases in your career that can
set you up to have an even greater impact later. This list is especially incomplete
compared to the others.
● Congressional staffer. Learn about policy making and government while having
a direct social impact by helping improve government policies.
● Economics PhDs. Get a valuable credential in a field relevant to most of our
priority paths (especially global priorities research), plus set yourself up for good
earning-to-give options.
● Machine Learning PhDs. Understand the cutting edge of machine learning in
order to contribute to the safe deployment of AI.
● Early-stage startup employee. Learn about founding a startup while gaining
connections and a broad skillset.
Other career reviews
Below are all the other career reviews we have written so far, listed alphabetically. Some
of this content is a little out of date, so take the advice with a pinch of salt.
● Actuarial science
● Allied health professional
● Biomedical research
● Computer Science PhD
● Data science (for skill-building & earning to give)
● Executive search
● Founding effective nonprofits (international development)
● Front office finance (for skill-building & earning to give)
● Management consulting (for skill-building & earning to give)
● Marketing (for skill-building & earning to give)
● Medical careers
● Nursing
● Party politics in the UK
● Philosophy academia
● Product manager in tech
● Programme manager in international organisations
● Pursuing fame in art and entertainment
● Teaching
● UK commercial law (for earning to give)
● Web designer
● Working at effective nonprofits (international development)

How to choose which career path youshould pursue
The purpose of these lists is to give you more ideas about high-impact career paths.
There are likely many other options worth considering for your personal list that we don’t
cover.
As we cover in our key ideas series, the overall impact of your career depends on both:
● How impactful the path is in general
● Your degree of personal fit with it
So once you have some good ideas, we recommend you narrow down based on fit —
including whether the path is likely to be sustainable and personally satisfying.
To help you work out which career path is best for you, we’ve created an eight-week
planning course to help you systematically think through important factors in choosing a
career, generate more ideas, and identify your best option. (After that, check out our job
board for opportunities in the career path that fits you best.)
Other key articles on leverage
● How to have a significant impact without changing your job

6. Personal fit: what are you good at?
Personal fit: why being good at your job is even
more important than people think
Click to read online
“Find work you’re good at” is a truism, but we think many people still don’t take it
seriously enough.
Finding the option where you have the best chance of excelling over the course of your
career — where you have your greatest ‘personal fit’ — is one of the key determinants
of your career’s impact. In fact, after initially identifying some promising paths, we think
it’s often themostimportant factor.
The first reason is that in many fields, data suggests that success is distributed
unevenly.
This is most pronounced in complex jobs like research or entrepreneurship. A key study
of ‘expert performance’ concluded:
A small percentage of the workers in any given domain is responsible for the
bulk of the work. Generally, the top 10% of the most prolific elite can be
credited with around 50% of all contributions, whereas the bottom 50% of the
least productive workers can claim only 15% of the total work, and the most
productive contributor is usually about 100 times more prolific than the least.
In the most skewed fields like these, your expected impact is roughly just the value of
outsized success multiplied by its probability — from an impact point of view, you can
roughly ignore the middling scenarios.
But in most jobs there are still sizable differences in output between, say, the top 20%
of performers and the average performers.
It’s unclear how predictable these differences are ahead of time, and people often
overstate them. But even if they’re only a little bit predictable, it could matter a great
deal — having slightly higher chances of success could result in large increases in
impact.
For instance, suppose in option A you expect to be average, and in option B you
expect to be in the top 30%. If the top 30% produce two times as much as average,

then it could be better to take option B, even if you think option A is up to two times
higher-impact on average.
If we also consider you’ll be less replaceable if you’re in the top 30%, the difference in
counterfactual impact could be even larger.
The second reason why personal fit is so important is that being successful in almost
any field gives you more connections, credibility, and money to direct towards pressing
problems — increasing your career capital and leverage.
If you succeed at something, that gives you a reputation and credentials you can use to
find future opportunities. You’ll also tend to meet other successful people, improving
your connections. And you might gain a platform or money you can use to promote
neglected issues. This idea is discussed more in our podcast with Holden Karnofsky.
Being good at your job is also one of the main ingredients of a satisfying job, which
helps you stay motivated in addition to being important in itself. It could easily be
more satisfying to be in the top 20% of a profession, even if it’s perhaps lower paid or
less glamorous than an alternative where you’d be average.
How important is personal fit compared to other factors?
You can think of your degree of personal fit with a career option as a multiplier on how
promising that option is in general, such that:39
total impact = (average impact of option) x (personal fit)
and
total career capital = (average career capital) x (personal fit)
This means that we often advise people to first identify some high-impact paths, and
then choose between them based on their degree of fit with them — especially
focusing on those where they might excel.
It also means that it can be worth taking a job that you think is, say, in your second tier
for impact, but is a better fit for you.
Because personal fit is so important, we would almost never encourage you to pursue a
career you dislike. Succeeding in almost any career takes many years and sometimes
decades of work. If you don’t like your job, you’re unlikely to stick with it that long, and
39More specifically, we define a person’s ‘personal fit’ for a job as the ratio between: 1) the productivity
that person would have in the job in the long term, and 2) the average productivity of other people who
are likely to take the job.

so you’ll forgo a lot of your impact. (And there are other reasons we wouldn’t
encourage you to pursue a career you dislike.)
Although it’s not what we most commonly recommend, it can sometimes even be
worth taking jobs that don’t have any direct connection to a particularly impactful path
in the short term because of the career capital you might get from excelling in them.
Isabelle Boemekestarted out as a fashion model, butafter
speaking to experts who said nuclear energy was needed
to tackle climate change (but were afraid to promote it due
to its unpopularity), she pivoted to using her social media
following to promote it. Becoming a fashion model isn’t
normally one of our recommendations, but it could still be
the right choice if your fit is high enough.
More generally, since you can have a significant impact in any job by donating, through
political advocacy, or being a multiplier on others, simply working hard and being more
successful in any path can let you have more impact.
What am I good at?
Academic studies and common sense both suggest that while it’s possible to predict
people’s performance in a path to some degree, it’s a difficult endeavour.40 What’s
more, there’s not much reason to trust intuitive assessments, or career tests either.41
So what does work?
Making predictions
Here are some questions you can use to make some initial assessments of your fit from
several different angles:
40The best study we’ve found showed that the best predictors of job performance only correlate about
0.5–0.65 with job performance. This means that much of the variance is unexplained, so that even a
selection process using the best available predictors will appear to regularly make mistakes. This
matches personal experience; it’s pretty common for hiring processes to make the wrong call and for
new hires to not work out. Schmidt, Frank L., et al. “The validity and utility of selection methods in
personnel psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 100 years…” Fox School of Business
Research Paper, 2016, 1-74.PDF
41Most career tests are based on ‘interest-matching,’ often using a system similar toHolland types.
However, meta-analyses have found that these methods don’t correlate or only very weakly correlate
with job performance. We cover some studies about thishere.

1. What do you think are your chances of success?42 To do this, look at your track
record in similar work and try to project it forward. For instance, if you were
among the top 25% of your class in graduate school, because roughly the top
half of the class continue to academia, you could roughly forecast being in the
top 50% of academia.43 To get a better sense of your long-term potential, look
at your rate of improvement rather than recent performance. (More technically,
you can try to make a base rate forecast).
2. What drives performance in the field, and how do you stack up? The first step
gives you a starting point, but you can try to improve your estimates by asking
yourself what most drives success in the field, and whether you have those traits,
as well as looking for other predictors of performance.
3. What do experts say? If you can, ask people experienced in the field for their
assessment of your prospects. Just be careful not to put too much weight on a
single person’s view, and aim to ask people who have had experience selecting
people for that job in question, and are likely to be honest with you.
4. Does it match your strengths? One way to gauge this is to look for activities that
don’t feel like work to you, but do for most people. We have an article about
how to assess your strengths.
5. Do you feel excited to pursue it? Gut-level motivation isn’t a reliable predictor of
success, but if youdon’tfeel motivated, it’ll be challenging to exert yourself at
the level required for high performance in most jobs. So a lack of excitement
should give you pause.
6. Will you enjoy it? To stick with it for the long term, the path would ideally be
reasonably enjoyable and fit with the rest of your life (e.g. if you want a family,
you may want a job without extreme working hours).
Learning to make good predictions is an art, and one that’s very useful if your aim is to
do good, so we have an article about how to get better at it.
Investigating your options
Many people try to figure out their career from the armchair, but it’s often more useful
to go and test things in the real world.
42If the outcome of a choice of career path is dominated by ‘tail’ scenarios (unusually good or bad
outcomes), which we think it often is, then you can approximate the expected impact of a path by
looking at the probability of the tail scenarios happening and how good/bad they are.
43If we suppose that the 50% with the best fit continue to academia, then you’d be in the top half. In
reality, your prospects would be a little worse than this, since some of your past performance might be
due to luck or other factors that don’t project forward. Likewise, past failures might also have been due
to luck or other factors that don’t project forward, so your prospects are a bit better than they’d naively
suggest. In other words, past performance doesn’t perfectly predict future performance.

If you have time, the next stage is to identify key uncertainties about your fit, and then
investigate those uncertainties.
It’s often possible to find low-cost ways to test out different paths. Start with the
lowest-cost ways to gain information first, creating a ‘ladder’ of tests. For example, one
such ladder might look like this:
1. First read our relevant career reviews and do some Google searches to learn the
basics (1–2h).
2. Then speak to someone in the area (2h).
3. Then speak to three more people who work in the area and read one or two
books (20h). You could also consider speaking to a career advisor who
specialises in this area.
4. Then look for a project that might take 1–4 weeks of work, like applying to jobs,
volunteering in a related role, or starting a blog on the policy area you want to
focus on. If you’ve done the previous step, you’ll know what’s best.
5. Only then consider taking on a 2–24 month commitment, like a work placement,
internship, or graduate study. At this point, being offered a trial position with an
organisation for a couple of months can also be an advantage, because it means
both parties will make an effort to quickly assess your fit.
In our planning process, we lead you through the process of identifying key
uncertainties for each stage of your career, and then making a plan to investigate them.
If at any point you learn that a path is definitely not for you, then you can end the
investigation.
Otherwise, when your best guess about which path is best stops changing, then it’s
time to stop doing tests and take a job for a few years. But that is also an experiment,
just on a longer time scale — as we discuss in our article on exploration.
Further reading
● Holden Karnofsky on building aptitudes and kicking ass
● How much do people differ in productivity? What the evidence says.
● How to improve your judgement
● How to judge your chances of success
● How to identify your personal strengths: A collection of the best advice and
research I’ve seen
● Don’t go with your gut
● What makes for a dream job?
● Balancing impact and happiness
● How to analyse replaceability

● Peak: Secrets from the New Science of Expertise, by Anders Ericsson, makes the
argument that success is mainly driven by years of focused practice. We think his
conclusions are too extreme, but it’s a provoking book, and the central idea —
that attaining high levels of performance requires a lot of practice and it’s
possible to improve most of our skills — seems correct. Also see this nice
summary of Ericsson’s career by Cal Newport.
Other key articles on personal fit
● How to identify your personal strengths: collection of the best advice and
research we’ve seen

7. Strategy: how to find your best career
Career capital: how best to invest in yourself
Click to read online
A key strategic consideration is ‘career capital’ — the skills, connections, credentials,
and financial resources that can help you have a bigger impact in the future.
Career capital is potentially a vital consideration because people seem to become
dramatically more productive over their career. Our impression is that most people
have little impact in their first couple of jobs, while productivity in most fields seems to
peak at age 40–50.44 This suggests that by building the right career capital, you can
greatly increase your impact, and that career capital should likely be one of your top
considerations early in your career.
This leaves the difficult question of which options help you gain the best career capital,
putting you in the best position to take the highest-impact roles addressing the world’s
most pressing problems.
How to gain the best career capital?
We’ve noticed that people often think the best way to gain career capital is by doing
prestigious jobs, such as consulting. We think consulting is a good option for career
capital, but it’s rarely the most direct route into our priority paths.
You can see our write ups of individual priority paths for our thoughts on the best next
steps to gain career capital within those paths. Some options stand out as good for a
variety of paths and also have reasonable backup options:
● Go to graduate school in a subject that provides a good balance of personal fit,
relevance, and backup options, with the aim of working in policy or doing
relevant research. We’d especially highlight graduate study in economics and
machine learning, since they provide good career capital and have great backup
options, but some other useful subjects include: security studies, international
relations, public policy, relevant subfields in biology, and more. Start with a
master’s, and only add a PhD if you plan to focus on research.
● Work as a research assistant at a top think tank, aiming to specialise in a
relevant area of policy, such as technology policy or security — especially if
you’d be working under a good mentor.
44Income usually peaks in the 40s, suggesting that it takes around 20 years for most people to reach
their peak productivity. See the footnote on ourCareercapitalpage for more discussion.

● Take other entry routes into policy careers, such as (in the US) certain
congressional staffer positions, joining a congressional campaign, or working
directly in certain executive branch positions. In the UK, the equivalent would be
working in the civil service, or working for a politician.
● Work at a top AI lab, including in certain non-technical roles. This potentially
gives you similar career capital benefits to consulting, but with more relevance
to AI. Certain jobs in ‘big tech’ can also be more attractive than consulting,
especially if you can work in a relevant area or develop a useful skillset, such as
AI or information security.
● Join a particularly promising startup, especially in the for-profit tech sector,
though small and rapidly growing organisations in any sector are worth
considering. Look for an organisation with impressive people, and a role that lets
you develop concrete and relevant skills (especially management, operations,
entrepreneurial, general productivity, and generalist research skills). It’s also ideal
to join an organisation working within a relevant area, such as AI or
bioengineering. These roles may help you build relevant skills and connections,
and also give you the opportunity to advance quickly. If you can build a network
of people working in startups, then you can also try to identify an organisation
that’s unusually credible (e.g. backed by a range of impressive funders), and
which might be on a breakout trajectory, which would give you the chance of
further upside (e.g. reputation, money).
● Do something that lets you learn about China, such as taking the steps listed
here.
● Work at a top nonprofit or research institute in a top problem area, such as
some of those we list in our recommended organisations.
● Take any option where you might be able to have unusually impressive
achievements. For instance, we came across someone who had a significant
chance of landing a national TV show in India as a magician and was deciding
between that and… consulting. It seemed to us that the magician path was
more exciting, since the skills and connections within media would be more
unusual and valuable for work on pressing problems than those of another
consultant.
● If you might be able to do something with significant positive impact in the next
five years (such as founding a new nonprofit), that can often be a great choice —
not only is it impressive, but it also gives you connections and skills that are
highly relevant to solving the problem you’re working on.

Specialist vs transferable career capital
One common theme in the above is that, surprisingly often, there is little tradeoff
between getting career capital and doing the natural first step towards top long-term
roles.
However, there can be some tradeoff between gaining ‘specialist’ career capital versus
‘transferable’ career capital.
● Transferable career capital is relevant in lots of different options. For example,
management skills (which are needed by almost every organisation), or
achievements that are widely recognised as impressive.
● Specialist career capital, like knowledge of and connections within a specific
global problem, prepares you for a narrow range of paths, but is often necessary
to enter the highest-impact options.
Our overall view is that the rewards of specialisation are often high enough to make the
costs worth it, especially if you also maintain some backup options while specialising.
Specialising increases the risk that if the situation changes, your skills could become
less useful. If you’re early in your career and/or very uncertain about which long-term
options are the best fit for you, it can be better to focus on transferable career capital
and plan on specialising later. Indeed, there’s a chance the best option for you is
something you haven’t even thought of yet, and gaining transferable career capital is
the best way to prepare for that.
Should you wait to have an impact?
Later in your career, you’re more likely to have the option to take a job with immediate
impact right away. At this point, how to value gaining career capital versus having an
immediate impact becomes a much harder issue to settle.
For instance, if you could work as an AI safety engineer today, should you still do a PhD
to try to open up potential research positions you think might be higher impact?
If you do the PhD, not only do you give up the impact you would have had early on,
you’re also delaying your impact further into the future. Most researchers on this topic
agree that, all else being equal, it’s better to put resources towards fixing the world’s
most pressing problems sooner rather than later. You might also give up on trying to
have an impact in the meantime, and informal polls suggest the annual risk of this
might be quite high. Finally, you gainsomecareer capital from almost every
reasonable option, so what matters is theextracareer capital you get from the PhD
compared to working as an AI safety engineer.

On the other hand, by making the right investments, it’s possible to increase your
impact a great deal, so the tradeoff can go either way. Overall, we’re excited to see
people take unusually good opportunities to gain career capital, especially those that
open up specific paths that seem much higher impact.
Career capital is also more important earlier in your career on average, since you’ll have
more time to make use of your investments in future roles.
Further reading
● Our article on alternatives to consulting
● Our article on why it’s important to have a financial safety net
● Read more of the arguments for and against delaying your impact inDynamic
Public Good Provision under Time Preference Heterogeneity: Theory and
Applications to Philanthropyby Phil Trammel, or this shorter article by Toby Ord
● Our article on which jobs put you in the best long-term position
● Our article on all the evidence-based advice we found on how to be more
successful in any job
● Holden Karnofsky on building aptitudes and kicking ass
Career exploration: when should you settle?
Click to read online
Suppose you’ve researched different career paths, and now need to make a choice:
1. ‘Settle’: commit to the path that seems best now.
2. Explore: try other paths with the hope of finding something even better.
What should you do?
Steve Jobs liked to say you should “never settle,” but there’s a real balance to be
struck between exploring and committing.
Many hope to be able to find and commit to their career calling right away, but this is
rarely possible because it’s so hard to predict where you’re going to succeed in the
long term.
Rather, you should approach your career like a scientist doing experiments. This means
you should be prepared to test out several paths, if possible.
While everyone would ideally do some career exploration, the interesting question is
how muchyou should plan to explore, and how best to balance the costs of exploring
with its upsides.

There’s been plenty of research in decision science, computer science, and psychology
that can help us answer this question. In this article, we combine these findings with
what we’ve learned from advising people one-on-one, and summarise some of the
bottom lines.
We’ll argue that if you want a career that’s not only satisfying but has a significant
positive impact — our focus at 80,000 Hours — then the value of exploration is even
higher.
Career exploration in a nutshell
● In addition to building career capital and having an impact, trying a job gives
you ‘information value’ about which paths will be best for you in the long term.
● The paths with the highest information value are the ones that might be a lot
better than your current best guess, but that you’re very unsure about and can
learn about relatively quickly.
● One career exploration strategy is to choose the path that would be
highest-impact if it goes unusually well (in an ‘upside scenario’), stick with it if it
works out, and try something else if it doesn’t. (Though make sure you’re OK
with this degree of risk and have a backup plan.)
● Another career exploration strategy is to plan to try out several paths, which
could include ‘wildcards’ outside your experience, minimising the costs by
carefully ordering your options. This strategy is most attractive right at the start
of your career and for perhaps 2–8 years in total.
● In general, it’s most important to explore early in your career, since you have
more uncertainty at this stage and more time to benefit from what you learn,
and the costs of trying different jobs and careers are lower.
● Be more open to quitting: people tend to stick in their current path too long
even when it’s not working out.
The information value of exploration
The typical 25- to 34-year-old changes jobs every three years, and changes are not
uncommon later in life too.45 Many successful people have tried several paths before
finding one that worked out — Tony Blair even worked as a rock promoter before
going into politics.
45“Median employee tenure was generally higher among older workers than younger ones. For
example, the median tenure of workers ages 55 to 64 (10.4 years) was more than three times that of
workers ages 25 to 34 years (3.0 years). A larger proportion of older workers than younger workers had
10 years or more of tenure. In January 2014, among workers ages 60 to 64, 58% were employed for at
least 10 years with their current employer, compared with only 12% of those ages 30 to 34.”Archived
link, retrieved 24-Apr-2017.

Many people don’t have the luxury of exploring different paths, but if you do, taking
that time can easily be worth it. For instance, if exploring meant you could find a career
path that’s twice as good as your current best guess, it would theoretically be worth
spending up to half of your career searching for that path.
We’ve argued that some career paths open to you will do 10 or 100 times as much to
help the world as others, and so even if you spent 10 years searching for a path like
this, it would be worth it — in your remaining 30 years of work, you’d achieve as much
as would have taken 300 in your previous path. It’s often possible to find paths that are
more enjoyable or give you better skills too.
We can analyse the value of exploration by using a concept from decision science —
‘information value.’
The information value of trying a job is what you learn about which longer-term paths
are best. The value depends on the chance that you discover a path that’s better than
your current best guess, weighted by how much better that new path is (based on
whatever you value).
When comparing jobs you might take during your job search, you care about both:
● The immediate impact of and satisfaction you gain from the job
● How well it sets you up to find better opportunities in the future
We can now see that the latter consists not only of the career capital you gain from the
job (such as transferable skills, professional network, and reputation), but also the
information value it gives you. We could say:
Contribution to long-term impact of job = immediate impact + career capital +
information value
The best job for you is the one that delivers the most value across all three factors, plus
the personal satisfaction you gain from it.
A job could be a ‘failure’ in the sense that you didn’t have any impact, or hated it and
quit. But if you’re able to eliminate a long-term path as a result of this experience, that
can still be valuable — you’ve just saved yourself years of wasted effort.
To sum up: each job you take is also an experiment to help you learn about what’s best
for you in the long term.

Amanda switched from philosophy to AI policy at age 29.
While doing that, she alsowrote abouthow the ‘information
value’ of testing different career options can be one of the
most significant considerations when working out how to do
good.Read more
Which jobs should you take to explore?
The paths that are best to try out (i.e. have the most information value) are those that:
1. Might bea lot betterthan your current best guess: if a path isn’t much better
than your current best guess, then even if your test goes well, you haven’t
gained much.
2. You’re uncertain about: if you already know it’s better, then you should just take
it now.
3. Could let you reduce your uncertainty relatively easily: if trying the path wouldn’t
tell you much about your fit, then there’s also not much to be gained from
testing it — better just to take your best guess now.
Can you think of a career path that meets all three of these conditions? If so, there’s a
pretty good case for trying it out.
We often advise people who feel very uncertain about which paths are best for them,
but are tempted to try out a corporate job, like accounting or consulting. While this
mightmake sense because of the helpful career capital, it often doesn’t have much
information value — these people usually don’t expect that the corporate path is their
best long-term path, and they’re normally pretty certain about that.
Tradeoffs of career exploration
The temptation to do the corporate job, however, does illustrate a real tradeoff: your
best job for information value might not be the best for career capital, impact, or
satisfaction.
Trying out a different career path not only takes years, but the costs can be even higher
than they first seem.

Some competitive careers have an ‘elevator’ structure, where if you get off the standard
track, it’s hard to re-enter — and even if youcanre-enter, it’s hard to make it to the top.
This can make it higher-risk to try out alternative paths early on, since by leaving you
might miss your chance of outsized success.
Academia is the most common example of this among our readers. Going from a PhD
to a postdoc, and then into a permanent academic position, is very competitive, and
it’s unlikely you’ll succeed if you don’t focus the vast majority of your effort on research.
This makes it hard to re-enter academia if you try something else after your PhD.46
Exploring alsodelaysyour impact, which could be a significant cost if you think there
are especially urgent opportunities to do good right now that won’t be around in the
future. For example, if you’re trying to shape fast-moving technologies, that will be
harder to influence as time goes on.
But we’ve also argued above that the potential gains to exploration are very large too,
especially if you want to have an impact. Going from ‘very good’ to ‘excellent’ might
only increase your own wellbeing a little bit, but it could mean having 10 times as much
impact.
So, both the benefits and costs of exploration can be large. What strategy should you
take to balance these?
Career exploration strategies
This question has been studied in computer science, as part of research into topics like
the ‘explore-exploit tradeoff’ and ‘optimal stopping’ (of which the ‘secretary problem’ is
one example). We discuss what we might learn from this research in-depth in our
interview with Brian Christian, author ofAlgorithmsto Live By: The Computer Science
of Human Decisions.
The lesson we take from this research is that there are two exploration strategies that
make sense practically. The first we call the upside option strategy, and is usually our
first recommendation. The second involves trying out several paths early career, and
then picking your best guess after that.
1. Pursue ‘upside options’: a rational reason to aim high
As we saw above, information value is higher the better an option might be, and the
more uncertain you are about it. This favours takinglong shots— paths that might be
outstanding if they go well, but have a good chance of not working out.
46Though it’s easier in some subjects like computer science or economics, and it’s fine to take a break
before your PhD.

Here’s a concrete process for doing that:
1. Rank the longer-term paths open to you in terms of upside — how much impact
you would have in them if you performedunusually wellcompared to your best
guess? (To be more precise, you could imagine how each path would look in the
top 10% of scenarios.) We call the career options that seem best in these ‘upside
scenarios’ your ‘upside paths.’
2. Try out one of your most promising upside paths.
3. If you find it’s going well, then continue.
4. If you’re not on track to hit the upside scenario, switch into the next-best upside
path.
This strategy is similar to the ‘upper confidence’ algorithm we discussed with Brian.
It’s attractive because there’s an asymmetry: in the good case, you’ve found an amazing
new career path, which you can continue with for many years; if it doesn’t work out, you
can switch to something else relatively quickly. The costs of spending a few months or
even years trying out a path are often low relative to the huge benefits if it turns out
well.
Taking this strategy is also attractive because if you’re trying an elevator career, you can
stick with it until you’ve decided you’re not likely to have outsized success, which is
often where most of the impact would come from. (There are also several other reasons
we think it’s good to aim high.)
However, there’s an important caveat to keep in mind: the asymmetry argument only
works if the downsides of exploration are capped:
● First, you have to make sure that you’re in a sufficiently robust position —
personally, professionally, and financially — that an experiment not working out
won’t do you considerable long-term harm. That means making sure you have a
backup plan and remain able to switch into something else if it doesn’t work out.
We discuss how to do this in our career planning process.
● Second, if you’re focused on impact, then in certain areas — ‘fragile fields’ — it’s
easy to make things much worse than you found them. If you’re doing
something high-stakes in one of these fields, it’s important to modify your plan
to reduce the chance of setting back the field before pursuing upsides. We
cover this in our article on accidental harm.
Finally, note that what counts as an ‘upside scenario’ should depend on how much you
want to prioritise exploration, which depends on how much you prioritise impact and
how early you are in your career. For instance, if you’re right at the start of your career,
you might want to aim at what’s best based on the top 5% of scenarios; if none work

out after a while, then reduce that to the top 20% of scenarios — and eventually focus
on the most likely scenarios.
2. Plan to try out several paths through careful ordering
The second career exploration strategy is to plan to try out several paths, and then
decide later which is best. If you order your options carefully, it’s often possible to try
several paths with minimal costs, then decide later which is best.
This strategy is similar to solutions to the ‘secretary problem’ in computer science. The
standard set up of the secretary problem seems to overstate how much you should
explore, but spending 5–20% of the total length of your career with exploration as a
top priority seems reasonable for people focused on impact, and that would be 2–8
years.47
One common pattern is to do a gap year before college, then try several internships
while at college, then do something more unusual and risky for 1–2 years after
graduating. If the unusual option goes well, you can continue, and otherwise you could
try going to graduate school, which ‘resets’ you onto a more standard path. For
instance, you could try an unusual startup or nonprofit project for a few years, and then
do a PhD and continue with academia, or go to law school and continue into policy,
and so on.
Later in your career, if you’re genuinely unsure between two options, you might want to
try the more ‘reversible’ one first. For instance, it’s easier to move from business to
nonprofits than vice versa.
While examples of people who specialised early, like Tiger Woods, are often salient, it
doesn’t seemnecessaryto specialise that early, and it’s probably not even the norm. In
the bookRange: Why Generalists Triumph in a SpecializedWorld, David Epstein argues
that most people try several paths, and that athletes who try several sports before
settling on one tend to be more successful — holding up Roger Federer as a foil to
Tiger Woods.
Another recent paper inNaturefound that ‘hot streaks’ among creatives and scientists
tended to follow periods of exploring several areas. This is just a single paper, but at
least suggests exploring several paths can be a good strategy in some cases.
Compared to the ‘upside options’ strategy, this strategy keeps you from committing to
anything for years, so has significant costs. If you can identify an upside path now,
trying it right away is usually better.
47Learn more in thisanalysis by Applied Divinity Studies.

Planning to try out several paths is most attractive when you’re very uncertain, when
you won’t risk compromising your future in an ‘elevator’ career, and when you’re early
in your career (when the costs of exploration are lowest).
Jess – a case study in trying several paths
“80,000 Hours has nothing short of revolutionised the way I think
about my career.”
READ JESS'S STORY
When Jess graduated with a degree in
maths and philosophy in 2012, she was
interested in academia and leaned towards
studying philosophy of mind, but was
concerned that it would have little impact.
So the year after she graduated, she spent
several months working in finance. She
didn’t think she’d enjoy it, and she turned out to be right, so she
felt confident eliminating that option. She also spent several
months trying different types of work — working in nonprofits and
reading about different research areas.
Most importantly, she spoke to loads of people, especially in the
areas of academia she was most interested in. This eventually led
to her being offered to study a PhD in psychology, with a focus on
how to improve decision-making by policymakers.
During her PhD, she did an internship at a leading evidence-based
policy think tank, and started writing about psychology for an
online newspaper. This meant that she was exploring the ‘public
intellectual’ side of being an academic, and the option of going
into policy.
At the end of her PhD, she can either continue in academia, or
switch into policy or writing. She could also probably go back to
finance or the nonprofit sector. Most importantly, she’ll have a far
better idea of which career options are best for her.
Consider including a wildcard
One drawback of both of the strategies above as written is that your best path might
well be something you haven’t even thought of yet.

This could suggest exploring and testing out options outside your normal experience,
to give yourself the chance of uncovering something totally different. That might mean
living in a very different culture, participating in different communities, or trying
different sectors from the ones you already know (e.g. nonprofits, government,
corporate).
For instance, I (Benjamin) went to learn Chinese in China before I went to university. I
didn’t have any specific ideas about how it would be useful, but I felt I learned a lot
from the experience, and it turned out to be useful when I later worked with Brian Tse
to create our resources for people working on Sino-Western coordination around
emerging technologies.
This is similar to how in computer science, many exploration algorithms have a random
element. Making a random move can help avoid settling into a ‘local optimum.’ While
we wouldn’t recommend literally picking randomly, the fact that even computer
algorithms find randomness helpful illustrates the value of considering paths well off
your standard track.
3. Explore within your job
An alternative approach is to take a job that lets you try out several areas by:
● Enabling you to practise many different skills. Jobs in small companies are often
especially good on this front.
● Enabling you to work in a variety of industries, such as certain types of
freelancing or consulting positions.
● Giving you the free time and energy to explore things outside of work.
Be more willing to quit
Another rule of thumb to consider: if you’re on a path that’s only going so-so, you
should probably try something else. (If you can afford to.)
If the path is only going so-so, it’s probably not an upside option, and so doesn’t have
much information value. It’s probably also not a great fit.
Due to the sunk cost bias, we’d expect people to continue with their current path for
too long. We’d also expect people to want to avoid the short-term costs of switching,
and to be averse to leaping into an unknown new option.
This all suggests: if you’re on the fence about quitting your job, you should quit.
This is exactly what an influential randomised study found. Steven Levitt recruited tens
of thousands of participants who were deeply unsure about whether to make a big
change in their life. After offering some advice on how to make hard choices, those

who remained truly undecided were given the chance to flip a coin to settle the issue
— 22,500 did so.
Levitt followed up with these participants two and six months later to ask whether they
had actually made the change, and how happy they were one a scale of 1 to 10. It
turned out that people who made a change on an important question gained 2.2
points of happiness out of 10. Of course, this is just one study, and we wouldn’t be
surprised if the effect were smaller on replication. However, it lines up with what we’d
expect.
How much should you explore at different stages in your career?
It varies by person. If you’re following the upside option strategy, and you luck into
something great early on, you might never need to try anything else. Or, you may need
to try over and over again to get a hit.
However, there are clear arguments that people should generally explore more earlier
in their career. This is because when you’re early on:
1. You have the most time remaining to take advantage of new options you
discover, whereas if you find a new career path when you’re 60, you can only
benefit for a few years.
2. You have the least information about what’s best, since you haven’t tried many
jobs.
3. The costs of exploring are lower: young people are expected (oftenencouraged)
to change jobs more often, and there are low-cost opportunities to try things out
(like internships), which aren’t always available to older people.
This is the justification behind the common advice to be more ambitious and broaden
your horizons while young. The younger you are, the more you can focus on
information value — and the more you’re focused on information value, the more
ambitious the upside paths to aim for. As you get older, you’ll focus more on
‘exploiting’ your best-guess choice rather than exploring to find something even better.
However, you’ll keep learning about your fit and which options are best throughout
your career, so information value remains important for everyone. A middle-aged
person who has just quit a long corporate career would suddenly face more uncertainty
and lower costs to experimentation than most people their age, and so might do well
to go back into exploration mode for a period.

Conclusion: exploring step-by-step towards your best career
It can be intimidating to try something new, but it’s often well worth your while. You
don’t need to figure out your best career right away, and it’s not the norm. Most
careers proceed via a series of steps, each of which is an experiment. The best you can
do is have a good exploration strategy — one that minimises the costs of exploring
while giving you the best possible chance of finding an even better path.
Further reading
● Our podcast with Brian Christian on what we can learn from computer science
about how much to explore in your career.
● How long should you take deciding your career? on Applied Divinity Studies
further investigates how to apply the secretary problem to career choice.
● If you’re unsure whether to quit, probably quit.
● David Epstein on Mastery, Specialization, and Range, on EconTalk (the book
itself doesn’t add much to the arguments, though has more examples).
● How to Measure Anything by Douglas Hubbard has one of the best explanations
of ‘information value’ that we’ve seen, and is a great book in general. Here is a
summary.
● Four examples of value of information.
● Biases in career decisions and what to do about them.
How to balance impact and doing what you love
Click to read online
We think there’s less tension between the two than is often supposed. Finding work
you excel at and that helps others is fulfilling, and many of our readers say they’ve
become happier in the process. Moreover, you’ll have a greater impact if you find work
you enjoy and that fits with your personal life, because you’ll have a greater chance of
excelling in the long term. So enjoying your work and having an impact are often
mutually supportive goals.
This said, sometimes conflicts do arise. For instance, the higher-impact path may
involve working harder than would be ideal for your happiness, or it can involve taking
the risk of trying out several paths that don’t go anywhere. How to handle these
conflicts is a difficult issue.
We may live in a uniquely important time in history, with the opportunity to influence
the development of new technologies that could impact the long-term future and
reduce existential risks. We also have many other opportunities to help others a great

deal with comparatively little cost to ourselves. This motivates some of our readers to
make impartially doing good the main focus of their careers. Some philosophers, such
as Peter Singer, have argued that we have a moral obligation to do so.
However, most of our readers see ‘making a difference’ in the way we’ve outlined as
one among several important career goals, which may include other moral aims,
supporting a family, or furthering other personal projects.
Whatever your views on this topic, we think it’s important to take seriously the risk of
burning out if one engages in too much self-sacrifice. Even if your only career goal
were to make a difference, you should probably be aiming to contribute sustainably
over your entire 40-year career. This means it’s important to cultivate self-compassion
and take a path in which you’ll be motivated for the long term.
What’s more, one of the biggest ways to have more impact is to inspire others to
contribute, and this is much easier when you’re enjoying your life and career.
One technique that can be helpful is setting a target for how much energy you want to
invest in personal vs. altruistic goals. For instance, our co-founder Ben sees making a
difference as the top goal for his career and forgoes 10% of his income. However, with
the remaining 90% of his income, and most of his remaining non-work time, he does
whatever makes him most personally happy. It’s not obvious this is the best tradeoff,
but having an explicit decision means he doesn’t have to waste attention and
emotional energy reassessing this choice every day, and can focus on the big picture.
Further reading
● The ingredients of a satisfying career and our research behind this.
● Famine, Affluence and Morality
● Here are some philosophical arguments against the view that we have a moral
obligation to do good even when doing so involves substantial sacrifice:
Satisficing Consequentialism and Morality and Reasonable Partiality. On the
other side: Does Consequentialism Demand Too Much?
● Giving Gladly
Be more ambitious: a rational case for dreaming big
(if you want to do good)
Click to read online
Self-help advice often encourages people to “dream big,” “be more ambitious,” or
“shoot for the moon” — is that good advice?

Not always. When asked, more than 75% of Division I basketball players thought they
would play professionally, but only 2% actually made it.1 Whether or not the players in
the survey were making a good bet, they overestimated their chances of success… by
over 37 times.
This level of overconfidence is common, and means that “be more ambitious” may not
always be the right advice. Some people even enjoy taking risks, which explains why
they buy lottery tickets even though they lose money on average. Whether to be more
ambitious depends on the domain and the person in question.
However, if your aim is to have a positive impact on the world, we think we can make a
rational case for setting ambitious goals — based on the concepts in our key ideas
series.
In short, our advice is to do as much as you can to set up your life so that you can
afford to fail, and then aim as high as you can. As a slogan: limit downsides, target
upsides.
The fraction of high school athletes who will go pro is tiny. Even among Division 1
college athletes, 44–76% believe they will go pro (depending on the sport), but
typically under 2% actually make it— the odds arebest in baseball.
In a nutshell: why to be more ambitious
If you want to do good, here are four reasons to be more ambitious:

1. If you care about the number of people you help, it can be worth betting on a
small probability of helping a huge number (unlike with personal goals, where
most things have diminishing value).
2. The wide variation in how much good different career paths can do means that
low-probability, high-upside scenarios can be the biggest driver of your impact.
3. Aiming high has more information value, since you give yourself the chance of
being positively surprised.
4. Other actors are risk-averse, so you’ll face less competition.
In order to free yourself up to be ambitious, first limit downsides:
● Modify or eliminate options that might have a serious negative impact on you or
the world, or prevent you from trying again.
● Make sure you have a backup plan.
● Put yourself in a better position to take risks over time by investing in your
financial security, skills, and mental & physical health.
What do we mean by being more ambitious?
We mean you should aim high. More concretely we mean you should:
1. Make a list of longer-term career paths you could aim towards.
2. Think about how much positive impact you’d have if each path goes really well
(what we call an ‘upside scenario’).
3. Think about what will happen if the path goes badly. Modify or eliminate any
options that might have a big negative impact — either on your life or on the
world.
4. Then, to choose between the remaining paths, seriously consider pursuing the
one with the best outcome in the upside scenario.
To be more precise, we can define the upside scenario as the top 5% or top 10% of
possible outcomes. But even when you have no idea what the probabilities are, you
can still broadly target paths with high upsides. (You can also apply this rule of thumb
at the level of setting goals for specific projects, though our focus here is on
longer-term career paths.)
Aiming high means looking for paths that might turn out really well, even if they seem
wacky, or there’s a good chance they won’t work out.
Four reasons to be more ambitious
When we advise people on their impact, they often want to feel confident they’ve done
‘some’ good with their career, rather than bet on a small chance of achieving much

more. This is understandable, because it’s satisfying to know that you’ve achieved
something rather than nothing.
But if your aim is to help people, rather than just feel satisfied, it could be a big
mistake. By being open to long shots, ambitious people can greatly increase their
expected impact — even accounting for the chance their projects fail.
Here are four reasons why people who want to do good should bemoreopen to
taking risks than the norm.
1. A small chance of achieving a lot can still be worth a great deal (& much
more than in your personal life)
There are realistic ways you can make a contribution to some of the most important
and neglected issues of our time.
More than that, there’s a chance you could achieve something amazing. Maybe you can
start an important new charity, or run a media campaign that shifts people’s views of a
crucial issue. Maybe you could even win a Nobel Prize, be elected to Congress,
become prime minister, found a ‘megaproject’ nonprofit, or become a billionaire. If you
go in with a firm commitment to doing good, any of these wild achievements could
allow you to have an outsized impact.
These kinds of outcomes are all unlikely of course. But they might be more likely than
you think.
Several thousand people have changed careers based on our advice, and one of them
has already become a billionaire who has pledged his wealth to helping solve global
problems, and is also probably the world’s richest person under 30.
Sam Bankman-Fried is extremely talented and comes from a privileged background,
but one of his most notable traits (and also critical to his success) is that he aims high.
Sam probably took the idea of becoming a billionaire more seriously than 99% of our
readers. What would happen if you took the possibility of wild success seriously?
“80,000 Hours helped me think more critically about my
career choice, which has had a significant impact on where I
am today.”
READ SAM'S STORY

One of the general themes that I’ve become more and more convinced by over
time is that all the expected value is in the upside tails, and not in the median
outcomes usually. You should take that seriously, and it implies weird things.
Like that often the right path is the one that very well might fail. You should be
asking yourself the whole time: what is upside? What might it look like? Where is
it?
And I think that as the world speeds up and gets wackier, that becomes more
and more important. Sometimes things that sound crazy and unlikely, might be
unlikely, but maybe not so unlikely, that they’re not super valuable in
expectation.– Invest Like the Best Podcast
Even if the chance of an amazing outcome is very low, it could still be worth betting on.
Why?
From the perspective of making the world better, helping two people is twice as good
as helping one.
Taking this idea further, a 10% chance of saving 200 lives is better than a 90% chance
of saving 10. This follows from the idea of expected value.48
If thousands of our readers all pursued projects with a 10% chance of success, there
would be hundreds of successes, even if most don’t work out.
These are toy examples, and in reality we’ll never know the probabilities or outcomes
with much confidence. But it illustrates that it can be worth setting ambitious goals and
betting on comparatively unlikely outcomes — if the odds and upsides are high
enough.
This is much less true in your personal life. Gaining 10 new friends isn’t twice as good
as gaining five, since what we most care about is feeling like we have a community of
some kind. Most people would prefer $10 million with certainty compared to a 20%
chance of $100 million. This is because money (and most other things) have
diminishing value for individuals. So in your personal life, long-shot gambles are much
less attractive — aim for ‘good enough’ rather than maximising the potential upside.
48Everything we do has uncertain outcomes, but if we want to make a bigger difference we should do
what has the best expected outcome. This means multiplying the value of the outcome by the
probability of it occurring. 200 lives saved x 10% likelihood = 20 lives saved in expectation. 10 lives
saved x 90% probability = 9 lives saved in expectation. Using math in doing good might seem weird, but
when we’re dealing with uncertain outcomes (which we always are), we need it to choose between
actions.

Psychologically, most people are also loss-averse — losing a friend is a lot more painful
than gaining one is joyful — which makes it even more important to avoid big risks.
None of this applies to making the world a better place, where helping twice the
number of others, or helping them twice as much, reallyistwice as good. If you’ve
saved one life already, that doesn’t make it any less valuable to save another. So
do-gooders should be more open to taking risks.
This effect becomes more extreme the higher you aim. From a personal point of view,
gaining $10 million with certainty is a lot more attractive than a 2% chance of gaining
$10 billion. But if you’re going to donate the money, the second approach is about 20
times higher impact. Likewise, most people would prefer to have a job that’s ‘pretty
satisfying’ with near certainty, rather than a 2% chance of making a scientific
breakthrough.
(That’s not to say you should be risk-neutral. You shouldn’t be completely risk neutral
because there are still diminishing returns to altruistic resources at large enough scales.
This is especially true if you’re investing, since your investments will probably be
correlated with other donors. But it is justified to take a lot more risk than normal.)
In short, ‘satisfice’ your personal goals, but maximise your impact.
2. Upside scenarios can be where most of the expected impact is from
In the world of doing good, there’s a large skew in outcomes. Most importantly, we’ve
seen that in many fields, especially those like research or entrepreneurship, the most
successful people are often responsible for a significant fraction of the total impact.
(Just as Open Philanthropy and Sam are likely to be responsible for a significant
fraction of donations in effective altruism.)
This means that the expected value of entering the field is significantly driven by the
value of the upside scenario (adjusted for how likely it is). So, ‘having the most impact’
boils down to ‘focus on the (non-crazy) scenario with the most upside.’
This won’t always be true, but it’s at least worth seriously thinking about what great
outcomes might be possible, on the chance it is possible for you.
In our article on effective solutions, we tell the story of how Sophie Rose tried to make
a big contribution to ending COVID-19 early by advocating for human challenge trials.
Although she wasn’t able to succeed quite in time, her work will better prepare us for
the next pandemic.
More speculatively, focusing on upsides might be becoming more important as
technological advancement means that extreme changes are happening more and
more often.

One dizzying implication of this way of thinking is that from the perspective of your
impact, if one scenario is far higher impact than the others, it can sometimes be ideal
to actas ifit’s going to happen, and basically ignore the other scenarios.
For instance, if the 21st century is the most important century in history, then our
actions could have truly massive significance. If that’s not the case, the 21st century
won’t matter nearly as much from a historical perspective (in which case it doesn’t
matter as much what we do). Because our actions matter far more in the first scenario
than the second, we should act as if we know the first scenario is true.
3. You might surprise yourself
If you aim high, you might be positively surprised: maybe you can actually achieve the
upside scenario, and you’ve discovered an amazing path.
If, however, you discover the upside scenario is not going to happen, you can probably
switch to something else without great costs.
In other words, there’s an asymmetry: by aiming high, you might find an amazing career
path, while if it doesn’t work out, you’re probably in a similar situation to before. A lack
of ambition would cut you off from this possibility.
You can read more about this in our article on exploration, where we show that you
stand to learn the most from pursuing paths thatmightbe amazing, but where you’re
also really uncertain how they’ll turn out. The greater the uncertainty, the more you’ll
learn by trying it.
We’ve worked with lots of people who applied to a new job way out of their comfort
zone, thinking it was a long shot, and then not only went on to land the position, but
also excel in it.
4. Low-probability bets are neglected
Is the world of doing good more dominated by people who are overconfident (like
would-be professional basketball players) or people who are risk-averse? Our
impression is that it’s the latter. If so, this means high-upside paths will be relatively
neglected — perhaps especially at the very highest end.
Why do we have this impression? One reason is that many efforts to do good are done
by governments and nonprofits, and their incentives make it hard for them to take
low-probability, high-upside bets.
Suppose a government bureaucrat can fund a programme that has a 10% chance of an
amazing outcome, like speeding up vaccines for COVID-19 in 2020. After funding five
projects that don’t work, this bureaucrat will probably lose their job, even if the

expected value of each project was very high. On the other hand, if the bet pays off,
they’ll get few rewards — maybe a bit of praise from their colleagues, or a modest
raise, if they’re lucky. These incentives make people risk-averse.
We’ve seen some empirical evidence of this. In one study, the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute took a more risk-tolerant approach to funding medical research and seemed to
get better results than the US National Institutes of Health — the more conservative
government agency.
Carl Shulman discusses these dynamics on our podcast. Open Philanthropy also argues
that in the world of philanthropy, higher-risk bets are often better.
In other words, since most people don’t aim high, as you aim higher, you face less and
less competition. This means the odds of success decline more slowly than you might
expect. For example, while it might be harder to found a nonprofit with a budget of
$100 million than $10 million, it’s not obvious it’s 10 times harder.
Limiting downside risks
We’ve given the arguments for aiming high, but you can only set truly ambitious goals
after you’ve limited the downsides, so we’ll also talk briefly about why and how to do
that — setting yourself up to be as ambitious as possible.
Why limit downsides first?
If you aim high, there’s a good chance you won’t succeed. You’ll be better able to
maximise your long-term impact if you’re able to “stay in the game” and keep trying
until you succeed. So, it’s important to minimise any risks of outcomes that might
prevent you from trying again, like damaging your mental or physical health, or ruining
your reputation.
We’ve also seen that it’s perfectly reasonable to be risk- and loss-averse about your
personal life. This means it’s important to avoid risks that might make you a lot less
happy, or embark on paths with unacceptable downsides, like not being able to
support someone who is financially dependent on you.
Finally, in the world of doing good, it’s sometimes possible to make things a lot worse
than they were before. This is different from, say, the world of startups or investing,
when normally the worst-case scenario is that entrepreneurs lose your original
investment, and the risk is naturally capped.
The argument above to ‘focus on upsides’ only works when the potential for making
things better is a lot higher than making them worse. If you’re considering a path or
project that might have a big negative impact (rather than merely ‘fail’ and not achieve

much), then you need to carefully weigh the upsides and downsides. Most of the time,
we’d recommend simply avoiding projects like this, and then focusing on the biggest
upsides among your remaining options.
How to limit downsides
Even if you can’t easily estimate how likely risks are to materialise, you can often do a
lot to limit them, freeing yourself up to focus on upsides.
Over time, you can aim to set up your life to make yourself more able to take risks.
Some of the most important steps you can take include:
● Building up your financial security. If you’re at constant risk of failing to make
your rent, that’s a serious downside you can’t discount.
● Looking after your physical and mental health and important relationships, so
that your lifestyle is sustainable.
● Building valuable career capital that gives you backup options, e.g. through
building skills or finding good mentors.
When comparing different career paths, here are some tips:
1. Consider ‘downside scenarios’ for each of the paths you’re considering. What
might happen in the worst 10% of scenarios?
2. Look for risks that are really serious. It’s easy to have a vague sense that you
might ‘fail’ by embarking on an ambitious path, but what would failure actually
be like? The risks to be most concerned about are those that could prevent you
from trying again, or that could make your life a lot worse. You might find that
when you think about what would actually happen if you failed, your life would
still be fine. For example, if you apply for a grant for an ambitious project and
don’t get it, you will have just lost a bit of time.
3. If you identify a serious risk of pursuing some option, see if you can modify the
option to reduce that risk. Many entrepreneurs like Bill Gates are famous for
dropping out of college, which makes them look like risk-takers. But besides the
security provided by his upper middle-class background, Gates also made sure
he had the option to return to Harvard if his startup failed. By modifying the
option, starting Microsoft didn’t involve much risk at all. Often the most useful
step you can do here is to have a good backup plan, and this is part of our
planning process.
4. If you can’t modify the path to reduce the risk to an acceptable level, eliminate
that option and try something else.
5. Check with your gut. If you feel uneasy about embarking on a path even after
taking the steps above, there may be a risk you haven’t realised yet. Negative
emotions can be a sign to keep investigating to figure out what’s behind them.

Conclusion: it’s better to be too ambitious than not ambitious
enough
We advise people who are overconfident, as well as people who are underconfident.
But if your aim is to have an impact, underconfidence seems like the bigger danger. It’s
better to aim a little too high than too low.
But ambitious people do not need to be irrational. You don’t need to convince yourself
that success is guaranteed. To be worth betting on, you just need to believe that:
● Success is possible
● Your downsides are limited
● The expected value of pursuing the path is high
If you’ve found a path that might be amazing, make a backup plan and give it a go. It
may not work out, but it might be the best thing you ever decide to do.
If you’re inspired to start setting goals and update your career plan right now, take a
look at our planning process.
Further reading
● How much risk to take?
● Expected value: how can we know what makes a difference when uncertain?
● Black swan farming by Paul Graham
● Optimism for realists and the optimism heuristic by Danny Hernandez
● Julia Galef argues you don’t need to be irrationally overconfident to succeed in
The Scout Mindset. See this interview with her by Noah Smith.
● When should altruists be financially risk averse? & Should altruists use leverage?
by Brian Tomasik
● Risk aversion and investment for altruists by Paul Christiano
3 key career stages
Click to read online
If you want to have an impact, the aim is to find a job that has the potential to make a
big contribution to a pressing problem, and that’s a good fit for you. But how can you
find a job like that?
In the strategy section of our key ideas series, we discuss the value of exploration and
career capital, as well as many other ideas, like why to be more ambitious. Here we
sum them up into a simple career strategy.

Three career stages
How to find a great job in a sentence: get good at something that lets you effectively
contribute to pressing global problems.
To expand:
First, make some best guesses about which longer-term roles seem best to aim
towards, both in terms of impact and career capital. We’ve compiled a list of
high-impact options to help you get started, as well as advice on comparing them.
Your answer will only be a guess because it’s hard to predict where you’ll succeed in
the long term. We advocate taking an iterative approach, updating your best guess
every 1–3 years.
Once you have some best-guess longer-term roles, you can roughly follow these three
stages:
1. Explore: take low-cost ways to learn about and test out promising longer-term
roles, until you feel ready to bet on one for a few years. Exploration is most likely
to be the top priority ages 18–24.
2. Invest: take a bet on a longer-term path that could go really well (i.e. seek
upsides), by building the career capital that will most accelerate you in your
chosen path. In case it doesn’t work out, have a backup plan (i.e. limit
downsides). (Age 25–35.)
3. Deploy: use the strengths and career capital you’ve built to help implement the
most effective solutions to the most pressing problems at the time. (Age 36 and
up.)
These stages are just about what to emphasise at each time. In reality, it’s always
valuable to gain information about which paths are best, invest in your career capital,
and try to have an impact right away — and you might try to serve any of these
priorities at any stage in your career.
The stages last different amounts of time for different people. You might find a path
worth betting on straight after university, and if it goes well, never look back. For
example, Kuhan realised that his position as a student at Stanford gave him a great
platform to spread important ideas. He helped to start the Stanford Existential Risk
Initiative, which has helped hundreds of people learn about existential risks. Kuhan
skipped straight to deployment — which worked out well for him — but most people
probably need to try many different things before they find a path that works.
Your emphasis might also move back and forth over time. For instance, a 40-year-old
who decides to make a dramatic career change might go back into exploration mode
for several years. It all depends on your specific situation.

What stage are you in?
Besides your age, here are some questions to help you decide where to focus:
● How uncertain are you about which roles are the best fit? The more uncertain
you are, the more you should focus on exploration. But don’t wait too long
before taking a bet (a common mistake). You just need to find a role that’s worth
betting on, rather than one you’re confident in. If you have a good backup plan,
the downsides of taking a gamble are low, and just trying a path is often the
best way to learn about your fit with it.
● Are you learning? It’s often worth staying in investment mode as long as you’re
learning and becoming significantly more productive.
● How urgent are opportunities to contribute? Taking time to invest needs to be
weighted against the urgency of contributing to your chosen problems. If there
are opportunities to have a big impact today that are much better than those
you expect to find in the future, that can push you into deployment mode right
away. This could be due to the time being unusually pivotal (e.g. a pandemic is
starting) or because you’ve found an unusually good opportunity you might not
have in the future (e.g. Kuhan from above).
● How uncertain are you about which global problems will be the most pressing in
the future? The more uncertain you are about which global problems will be
most pressing in the future, the more you should focus on finding roles that can
be applied to many problems (e.g. manager, journalist, civil servant), rather than
narrow or specialist roles (e.g. expert in market stabilization for developing
economies). Similarly, the more uncertain you are, the more you should focus on
buildingtransferablerather than specialist career capital when investing. The
same arguments apply if you’re uncertain about what yourpersonalpreferences
will be in the future.
Why not to “keep your options open”
People who feel uncertain about their career often try to “keep their options open.”
There’s truth in this advice (as we’ll cover), but when people try to “keep their options
open” in practice, it often ends up being counterproductive. In particular, it often leads
people to:
● Defer thinking about which paths are actually best, rather than doing more
research to reduce their uncertainty.
● Stay in paths they know they don’t want to do long-term “to build career
capital” — even when those paths aren’t likely the best route towards their top
longer-term paths. (We often see people doing this with roles in professional
services and consulting).

● Pursue a middle-of-the-road path, rather than commit to something that might
be great in terms of career capital or impact (while bearing in mind they could
change paths if it doesn’t work).
Of course, all else equal, it’s better to have more options rather than less. For example,
you may be genuinely uncertain between two paths. If path A would let you switch into
path B, but it would be hard to move from path B to path A, that’s a good reason to
start with path A (and then switch into B if it doesn’t work out).
But for most purposes, we think other rules of thumb are more important to follow than
simply “keeping options open.”
The more fundamental rule of thumb is to “seek upsides and limit downsides.” Having
a great option potentially increases your upsides (if you take the option and it’s indeed
great) while having limited downsides (you don’tneedto take the option if you don’t
want to). But there are many other ways to seek upsides and limit downsides.
In particular, we usually find it’s more productive to do something more unusual and
ambitious (aiming high), but with a backup plan (to limit your downsides).
Another more fundamental rule of thumb is to try to gain the best career capital you
can — that usually does more to increase your options in the future than trying to “not
close any doors.”
In sum, we recommend the following three steps as a more productive way to
approach career strategy than “keeping your options open”:
1. First, if you’re uncertain about what’s best longer term, try to research your
options to reduce that uncertainty and make a best guess.
2. Then try out high-upside paths — whether those updates are in terms of impact
or career capital — (but with a backup plan to limit downsides).
3. Finally, you don’t need to have it all figured out right away: update your plan
every few years with what you’ve learned.
It can be unpleasant to face this uncertainty, but these steps will give you the best
chance of managing it, and of finding the best possible path for you.
What’s next
Now read the final article in the key ideas series, which sums up the most important
ideas we’ve covered, and why you might be able to find a career with perhaps 100
times as much impact.
Then, you can explore all our best resources on career planning, and start generating
(and narrowing down) the concrete options that might fit you best.

Other key articles on career strategy
● Doing good together: coordinating as a community
● How to be more successful: research-backed ways to invest in your personal
development within your current job
● How can you make the most of your time at college?
● How to avoid accidentally doing harm
● How much risk should you take?
● Alternatives to prestigious corporate jobs for career capital
● What makes for a satisfying job?

8. Conclusion: how much do careers differ
in impact?
Why some of your career options probably have
100x the impact of others
Click to read online
We believe that some of the career paths open to you likely have over 100 times more
positive impact than other paths you might take.
Why? In our key ideas series, we’ve shown that you can have more impact by:
1. Finding a bigger and/or more neglected problem
2. Finding a more effective solution
3. Finding a path with more leverage
4. Finding work that fits you better
We’ve also shown that there are big differences for each factor:
● Some problems seem hundreds of times more neglected relative to their scale
than others.
● Some solutions bring about 10-100 times more progress on the problem per
year of work.
● Some paths let you have many times more leverage on those solutions.
● You can have many times more impact in a path that’s a good fit.
On top of that, you can further increase your impact by having a good career strategy,
such as by striking the right balance between investing in yourself and having an
impact right away.
But also note that the differencesmultiply together, rather than merely add up.
For instance, if you can find a problem where additional resources are twice as
effective, and can direct twice as many resources to that problem through greater
leverage, then you’ll have four times as much impact.
If you can find a path that’s twice as good on each dimension, it would be 16 times
higher impact in total.
And we’ve shown that despite the huge uncertainties involved, it often seems possible
to find an option that’s 10 times better within each factor. If you could find a path that’s

10 times better, then when multiplied together, the differences across all factors could
be 10,000 times.
In practice, it’s normally not possible to find an option that’s better on every dimension.
For instance, by changing the problem area you’re working on, you might have less
confidence in your fit.
There are also some reasons to be sceptical of claims of outsized differences that we’ve
covered elsewhere in the series, such as regression to the mean and epistemic humility.
All considered, however, we think it’s often achievable to find a path that is 10 times
more impactful than what you’re currently focused on, and sometimes over 100 times
more impactful.
It’s easy to gloss over the significance of a 100 times difference, but let’s appreciate for
a moment just how much it matters. It could mean saving 100 times more lives,
reducing carbon emissions 100 times as much, or making 100 times more progress
reducing the biggest risks facing humanity.
These differences are not the only ethically relevant factors, and everyone has priorities
in life besides moral ones, but they do really matter.
Another implication is that if it’s possible to find an option that’s 100 times higher
impact than your current best guess, then 10 years in that path would achieve what
could have otherwise taken people like you1,000 years. You could then spend the next
30 years on a beach doing whatever you like, and still have done far more to help
others.
This shows that it could easily be possible to find a path that’s both higher-impact and
more personally satisfying than your current trajectory.
How is it possible that such big differences in impact exist?
One reason is the massive economic and technological bounty of the Industrial
Revolution, which means that today, many ordinary citizens of rich countries have what
would have been kinglike wealth and power in previous centuries.

And advancing technology may make the next century one of the most important in
history.
Our generation can wreck the climate for thousands of years, or we can build a
sustainable economy. We can continue to expand factory farming, or we can eradicate
it. We can allow new technologies like nuclear weapons to end civilisation, or we can
usher in a future better than we can imagine — and be good stewards for all future
generations.
Our aim is to help people like you understand this new power. If you have the good
fortune to have options about how you spend your career, you can help change the
course of history on these vital issues.
This is not an easy path, but it is a worthwhile one.
Finding the best path for you requires exploring, investing in yourself, being attentive
to risk, and making hard tradeoffs.
We’ve often felt racked with uncertainty about what to do, and overwhelmed at the
scale of the issues. But we’ve also found a meaning and satisfaction in our efforts,
especially as more and more people have united around them.

We still have a lot to learn, but we hope that by sharing what we’ve learned so far we
can help you avoid the mistakes we’ve made, and speed you along your path to an
impactful career.
You have 80,000 hours in your career. Make them count.
What’s next: make your new career plan
Now that you’ve read the series, here are two ways we can help you update your career
plan, and put these ideas into action:
1. Speak to our team one-on-one
If you’re interested in working on one of our top problem areas, our advising team
might be able to speak with you one-on-one. They can help you consider your options,
connect with others working on these issues, and possibly even help you find jobs or
funding opportunities.
2. Use our planning course to write your plan
If you want to think more about your plan first, sign up for our eight-week career
planning course. It takes everything we’ve learned about career planning and turns it
into a series of tips, prompts, and resources to help you clarify your longer-term goals
and turn them into actionable next steps. It’s designed to be useful no matter which
problems and career paths you want to focus on.
You can see everything online, or sign up to receive the course through a weekly email.
